The following is a conversation with Cal Newport.
He's a friend and someone who's writing like his book Deep Work, for example,
has guided how I strive to approach productivity and life in general.
He doesn't use social media and in his book Digital Minimalism,
he encourages people to find the right amount of social media usage
that provides value and joy.
He has a new book out called A World Without Email
where he argues brilliantly, I would say,
that email is destroying productivity in companies and in our lives.
And, very importantly, he offers solutions.
He is a computer scientist at Georgetown University
who practices what he preaches.
To do theoretical computer science at the level that he does it,
you really have to live a focused life that minimizes distractions
and maximizes hours of deep work.
Lastly, he's a host of an amazing podcast called Deep Questions
that I highly recommend for anyone who wants to improve their productive life.
Quick mention of our sponsors ExpressVPN,
Linode Linux Virtual Machines,
Sunbasket Meal Delivery Service,
and SimplySafe Home Security.
Click the sponsor links to get a discount and to support this podcast.
As a side note, let me say that Deep Work
or long periods of deep focused thinking
have been something I've been chasing more and more over the past few years.
Deep Work is hard, but it's ultimately the thing that makes life so damn amazing.
The ability to create things you're passionate about in a flow state
where the distraction of the world just fade away.
Social media, yes, reading the comments, yes, I still read the comments,
is a source of joy for me in strict moderation.
Too much takes away the focused mind and too little, at least I think,
takes away all of the fun.
We need both, the focus and the fun.
If you enjoy this thing, subscribe on YouTube,
review it on the Apple Podcast,
follow on Spotify, support on Patreon,
or connect with me on Twitter at Lex Friedman
if you can only figure out how to spell that.
And now, here's my conversation with Cal Newport.
What is Deep Work?
Let's start with a big question.
So, I mean, it's my term for when you're focusing without distraction.
On a cognitively demanding task, which is something we've all done,
but we had never really given it a name necessarily
that was separate from other type of work.
And so, I gave it a name and said,
let's compare that to other types of efforts you might do while you're working.
And see that the Deep Work efforts actually have a huge benefit
that we might be underestimating.
What does it mean to work deeply on something?
You know, I had been calling it hard focus.
In my writing before that, well, so the context you would understand,
I was in the theory group in CSAIL at MIT, right?
So, I was surrounded at the time when I was coming up with these ideas
by these professional theoreticians.
And that's like a murderer's row of thinkers there, right?
I mean, it's like Turing Award, Turing Award, MacArthur, Turing Award.
I mean, you know, the crew, right?
Theoretical computer science.
Theoretical computer science, yeah.
So, I'm in the theory group, right?
Doing theoretical computer science, and I publish a book.
So, you know, I was in this milieu where I was being exposed to people
where focus was their tier one skill.
Like, that's what you would talk about, right?
Like, how intensely I can focus, that was the V key skill.
It was like your 440 time or something if you were an athlete, right?
So, this is something that people were actually,
the theory folks are thinking about?
Oh, yeah.
Really?
Like, they're openly discussing like,
how do you focus on that?
I mean, I don't know if they would, you know, quantify it,
but focus was the tier one skill.
So, you would come in, here would be a typical day,
you'd come in and Eric Domain would be sitting in front of a whiteboard,
right, with a whole group of visitors who had come to work with them.
And maybe they projected like a grid on there
because they're working on some graph theory problem.
You go to lunch, you go to the gym, you come back,
they're sitting there staring at the same whiteboard, right?
Like, that's the tier one skill.
This is the difference between different disciplines.
Like, I often feel, for many reasons, like a fraud,
but I definitely feel like a fraud when I hang out
with like either mathematicians or physicists.
It's like, it feels like they're doing the legit work
because when you talk closer in computer science,
you get to programming or like machine learning,
like the experimental machine learning
or like just the engineering version of it.
It feels like you're gone so far away from what's required
to solve something fundamental about this universe.
It feels like you're just like cheating your way
into like some kind of trick to figure out
how to solve a problem in this one particular case.
That's how it feels.
And so I'd be interested to hear what you think about that
because programming doesn't always feel like you need to do something.
It feels like you need to think deeply, to work deeply.
But sometimes it does.
So it's a weird dance.
For sure code does, right?
I mean, especially if you're coming up
with original algorithmic designs,
I think it's a great example of deep work.
I mean, yeah, the hardcore theoreticians,
they push it to an extreme.
I mean, I think it's like knowing that athletic endeavor is good
and then hanging out with an Olympic athlete.
Like, oh, I see that's what it is.
Grad students like me, we're not anywhere near that level,
but the faculty in that group,
these were the cognitive Olympic athletes.
But coding, I think, is a classic example of deep work
because I got this problem I want to solve.
I have all of these tools,
and I have to combine them somehow creatively and on the fly.
But so basically, I had been exposed to that.
So I was used to this notion when I was in grad school
and I was writing my blog, I'd write about hard focus.
You know, that was the term I used.
Then I published this book, So Good They Can't Ignore You,
which came out in 2012.
So like right as I began as a professor.
And that book had this notion of skill being really important
for career satisfaction,
that it's not just following your passion.
You have to actually really get good at something,
and then you use that skills as leverage.
And there's this big follow up question to that book of,
okay, well, how do I get really good at this?
And then I look back to my grad school experience,
I was like, huh, there's this focus thing that we used to do.
I wonder how generally applicable that is
into the knowledge sector.
And so as I started thinking about it, it became clear
there's this interesting storyline that emerged that,
okay, actually undistracted concentration is not just
important for esoteric theoreticians.
It's important here and support here and support here.
And that involved into the deep work hypothesis,
which is across the whole knowledge work sector,
focus is very important.
And we've accidentally created circumstances
where we just don't do a lot of it.
So focus is the sort of prerequisite for basically,
you say knowledge work, but basically any kind of skill
acquisition, any kind of major effort in this world.
Can we break that apart a little bit?
Yeah, so a key aspect of focus is not just that you're
concentrating hard on something,
but you do it without distraction.
So a big theme of my work is that context shifting kills
the human capacity to think.
So if I change what I'm paying attention to to something
different, really, even if it's brief and then try to bring
it back to the main thing I'm doing,
that causes a huge cognitive pile up that makes it very
hard to think clearly.
So even if you think, okay, look, I'm writing this code
or I'm writing this essay, and I'm not multitasking
and all my windows are closed and I have no notifications on,
but every five or six minutes you quickly check,
like an inbox or your phone, that initiates a context shift
in your brain, right?
We're going to start to suppress some neural networks
and we're going to try to amplify some others.
It's a pretty complicated process, actually.
There's a sort of neurological cascade that happens.
You rip yourself away from that halfway through
and go back to what you're doing,
and now it's trying to switch back to the original thing,
even though it's also in your brains in the process
of switching to these emails and trying to understand
those contexts, and as a result,
your ability to think clearly just goes really down.
And it's fatiguing, too.
I mean, you do this long enough that you get midday
and you're like, okay, I can't think anymore.
You've exhausted yourself.
Is there some kind of perfect number of minutes,
would you say?
So we're talking about focusing on a particular task
for one minute, five minutes, 10 minutes, 30 minutes.
Is it possible to kind of context switch
while maintaining deep focus every 20 minutes or so?
So if you're thinking of like this, again,
maybe it's a selfish kind of perspective,
but if you think about programming,
you're focused on a particular design of a little bit,
maybe a small scale on a particular function
or a large scale on a system,
and then the shift of focus happens like this,
which is like, wait a minute,
is there a library that can achieve this little task
or something like that?
And then you have to look it up.
This is the danger zone.
You go to the internet.
And so you have to, now it is a kind of context switch
because as opposed to thinking about the particular problem,
you now have switch thinking about like consuming
and integrating knowledge that's out there
that can plug into your solutions to a particular problem.
It definitely feels like a context switch,
but is that a really bad thing to do?
So should you be setting it aside always
and really trying to, as much as possible, go deep
and stay there for like a really long period of time?
Well, I mean, I think if you're looking up a library
that's relevant to what you're doing, that's probably okay.
And I don't know that I would count that as a full context shift
because the semantic networks involved are relatively similar.
You're thinking about this type of solution.
You're thinking about coding.
You're thinking about this type of functions.
What you're really going to get hit
is if you switch your context to something that's different
and if there's unresolved obligations.
So really the worst possible thing you could do
would be to look at like an email inbox.
I guess here's 20 emails.
I can't answer most of these right now.
They're completely different.
Like the context of these emails, like, okay,
there's a grant funding issue or something like this
is very different than the coding I'm doing.
And I'm leaving it unresolved.
So it's like someone needs something from me
and I'm going to try to pull my attention back.
The second worst would be something that's emotionally arousing.
So if you're like, let me just glance over at Twitter.
I'm sure it's nice and calm and peaceful over there, right?
That could be devastating because you're going to expose yourself
to something that's emotionally arousing.
That's going to completely mess up the cognitive plateau there.
And then when you come back to, okay, let me try to code again,
it's really difficult.
So it's both the information and the emotion.
Yeah, both can be killers if what you're trying to do.
So I would recommend at least an hour at a time
because it could take up to 20 minutes
to completely clear out the residue
from whatever it was you were thinking about before.
So if you're coding for 30 minutes,
you might only be getting 10 or 15 minutes
of actual sort of peak lexicon on there, right?
So an hour at least, you get a good 40, 45 minutes plus.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do that.
But it's just a really good 40, 45 minutes plus.
I'm partial to 90 minutes as a really good chunk.
We can get a lot done.
But just before you get exhausted,
you can sort of pull back a little bit.
Yeah.
And one of the beautiful people can read about
in your book, Deep Work,
and I know this has been out for a long time
and people are probably familiar with many of the concepts,
but it's still pretty profound
and it has stayed with me for a long time.
There's something about adding the terms to it
that actually makes you feel like it's not
the terms to it that actually
solidifies the concepts,
like words matter. It's pretty cool.
And just for me,
sort of as a comment,
there's
it's a struggle and it's very difficult
to maintain focus
for a prolonged period of time,
but the days on which
I'm able to accomplish several hours
of that kind of work,
I'm happy.
So forget being productive and all that.
I'm satisfied with my life.
I feel fulfilled.
It's like joyful.
And then I can be,
I'm less of a dick to other people
in my life afterwards.
It's a beautiful thing.
And I find the opposite
when I don't do that kind of thing,
I'm much more irritable.
I feel like I didn't accomplish anything
and there's this stress that then
the negative emotion builds up to where
you're no longer able to sort of
have a lot of this amazing life.
So in that sense, deep work has been a source
of a lot of happiness.
I'd love to ask you,
again, you cover this in the book,
but how do you integrate deep work
into your life? What are different scheduling strategies
that you would recommend just at a high level?
What are different ideas there?
Well, I mean, I'm a big fan of time blocking.
If you're facing your work day,
don't allow
your inbox or to do list
to sort of drive you. Don't just come into your day
and think, what do I want to do next?
I'm a big fan of saying, here's the time
available.
Let me make a plan for it.
I have a meeting here. I have an appointment here.
Here's what's left. What do I actually want to do with it?
In this half hour, I'm going to work on this.
For this 90 minute block, I'm going to work on that.
And during this hour, I'm going to try to fit this in
and then actually have this half hour gap between two meetings.
So why don't I take advantage of that to go run five errands?
I can kind of batch those together.
But blocking out in advance,
this is what I want to do with the time available.
I mean, I find that's much more effective.
Now, once you're doing this, once you're in a discipline of time blocking,
it's much easier to actually see,
this is where I want, for example, to deep work.
And I can get a handle on the other things that need to happen
and find better places
to fit them so I can prioritize this.
And you're going to get a lot more of that done
than if it's just going through your day and saying,
what's next?
I schedule every single day kind of thing.
So as I could try to do in the morning to try to
have a plan.
I do a quarterly, weekly, daily planning.
So at the semester or quarterly level,
I have a big picture
vision for what I'm trying to get done
during the fall, let's say, or during the winter.
There's a deadline coming up
for academic papers at the end of the season.
Here's what I'm working on.
I want to have this many chapters done of a book, something like this.
You have the big picture vision
of what you want to get done.
Then weekly, you look at that
and then you look at your week
and you put together a plan for like,
what's my week going to look like?
What do I need to do?
How am I going to make progress on these things?
Maybe I need to do an hour every morning
or I see that Monday is my only really empty day.
So that's going to be the day that I really need to nail
on writing or something like this.
And then every day, you look at your weekly plan
and say, let me block off the actual hours.
So you do that three scales,
the quarterly down to weekly down to daily.
And we're talking about actual times of day
versus so the alternative is
what I end up
doing a lot and I'm not sure
it's the best way to do it is
scheduling
the duration of time.
This is called the luxury when you don't have any meetings.
I'm like, religiously
don't do meetings.
All other academics are jealous of you, by the way.
I know.
No Zoom meetings.
I find those are,
that's one of the worst tragedies
of the pandemic
is both the opportunity to
have a positive thing
is to have more time with your family,
sort of reconnect in many ways
and that's really interesting.
Be able to remotely
sort of not waste time on travel
and all those kinds of things.
The negative is
actually both those things are also sources of the negative.
But the negative is like
it seems like people have multiplied the number of meetings
because they're so easy to schedule
and there's nothing
more draining to me
intellectually, philosophically.
My spirit
is destroyed
by even a 10 minute Zoom meeting.
What are we doing here?
What's the meaning of life?
Every Zoom meeting
I have an existential crisis.
Kierkegaard with the internet connection.
What the hell are we talking about?
When you don't have meetings,
there's a luxury
to really
allow for certain things
if they need to, like the important things
like deep work
sessions to last way longer
than you maybe
planned for. I mean that's my goal
is to try to schedule, the goal is to schedule
to sit and focus for a particular
task for an hour
and hope I can keep going
and hope I can get lost in it.
And do you
find that this is at all
an okay way to go
and the time blocking
is just something you have to do
to actually be an adult and operate in this real world?
Or is there some
magic to the time blocking?
Well, I mean, there's magic to the intention.
There's magic to it
if you have varied
responsibilities, right? So I'm often
juggling multiple jobs
essentially. There's academic
stuff, there's teaching stuff, there's book stuff,
there's the business surrounding
my book stuff.
But I'm
of your same mindset. If a deep work
session is going well,
just rock and roll and let it go on.
So like one of the big keys of time block
at least the way I do it. So I even sell
this planner to help people time block.
It has many columns because
the discipline is, oh, if your initial schedule
changes, you just
move over one, next time you get a chance to move over one
column and then you just fix it for the time
that's remaining. So in other words, there's
no bonus for
I made a schedule and I stuck with it.
There's actually not like you get a prize for it, right?
Like for me, the prize is
I have an intentional plan for my time
and if I have to change that plan, that's fine.
Like the state I want to be is basically
at any point in the day, I've thought about what time
remains and gave it some
thought for what to do because I'll do the same thing
even though I have a lot more
meetings and other types of things I have to do in my
various jobs and I basically prioritize
the deep work and they get yelled at a lot.
So that's kind of my strategy is like just be
okay, just be okay getting yelled at a
lot because I feel you, if you're rolling
yeah, well, that's what it is for me.
Like with writing, I think it's
writing so hard in a certain way that it's
you don't really get on a roll in some
sense, like it's just difficult.
But working on proofs,
it's very hard
to pull yourself away from a proof
if you start to get some traction.
You've been at it for a couple hours and you feel
the pins and tumblers starting to click
together and progress is being made.
It's really hard to pull away from
that. So I'm willing to get yelled at by almost everyone.
Of course, there is
also a positive
effect to pulling
yourself out of it when things
are going great because then you're kind of excited
to resume. It's
supposed to stopping on a dead end.
That's true.
There's an extra
force of procrastination that comes with
if you stop on a dead end
to return to the task.
Yeah, or a cold start.
Like I'm on a stage now,
I submitted a few papers recently.
So now we're sort of starting
something up from cold and it takes way
too long to get going because it's very hard
to get the motivation to schedule
the time when it's not, yeah, we're in it.
Here's where we are, we feel like something's
about the gift here. We need the very early stages
where it's just, I don't know,
I'm going to read hard papers and it's going to be hard
and I'm going to have no idea how to make progress.
It's not
motivating. What about deadlines?
Can we, okay, so this is like
a therapy session.
It's why
it seems like I don't, I only get stuff
done that has deadlines.
And so the one of the
implied powerful things about time blocking
is there's a kind of deadline
or there's artificial
or real sense of urgency.
Do you think it's possible to
get anything done in this world without deadlines?
Why did deadlines work so well?
Well, I mean, it's a clear motivational
signal, but in the
short term, you do get an effect like that
in time blocking. I think the strong effect
you get by saying, this is the
exact time I'm going to work on this
is that you don't have the debate with yourself
every three minutes about
should I take a break now? This is the big
issue with just saying, you know, I'm going to go write.
I'm going to write for a while and that's it
because your mind is saying, well, obviously we're going to take some breaks.
We're not just going to write forever.
And so why not right now?
They're like, well, not right now. Let's go a little bit longer
five minutes. Why don't we take a break now? We should probably
look at the internet. Now you have to constantly have this battle.
On the other hand, if you're in a time block schedule,
I've got these two hours put aside for writing.
That's what I'm supposed to be doing.
I have a break scheduled over here.
I don't have to fight with myself.
And maybe at a larger scale, deadlines give you
a similar sort of effect.
I know this is what I'm supposed to be working on because it's
due.
Perhaps, but we are describing as much healthier
sort of
giving yourself over and you talk about this in
the new email book as the process.
I mean, in general, you talk about it all
over is creating a process and then
giving yourself over
to the process.
But then you have to be
strict with yourself.
But what are the deadlines you're talking about?
Like with papers? What's the main type of
deadline work?
Well, so papers, definitely.
But, you know,
publications, like say this podcast,
I have to
publish this podcast
early next week one because your book
is coming out. I'd love to
support this amazing book.
But the other is I have to
fly to Vegas
on Thursday
to run 40 miles with David Goggins.
And so I want
this podcast, this conversation
we're doing now to be out of my life.
Like, I don't want to be in a hotel
in Vegas, like
editing the, like freaking out while David
Goggins is yelling. On hour, on hour
43 of
your terephthong thing.
But actually it's possible that I still
will be doing that, you know, because it's
that's not a heart, that's a softer deadline, right?
But those are sort of, life imposes
these kinds of deadlines.
I'm not, so yeah, papers are nice
because there's an actual deadline.
But I am almost
referring to like
the pressure that people put on you.
Hey man, you said you're going to get this done
two months ago. Why haven't you gotten it done?
I don't see, I don't like that pressure.
Yeah. So maybe now, first of all, I think we can
I ate it too. We can agree by the way, having
David Goggins yell at you is probably
the top productivity technique.
I think we'd all get a lot more
done if he was yelling.
But see, I don't like that. So I will try
to get things done early. I like having
flex. I also don't like the idea
of this has to get done
today, right? Like, it's due
at midnight and we've got a lot to do
as the night before because then I get in my head
about what if I get sick? Or like
what if, you know, what if I
get a bad night's sleep and I can't think clearly.
So I like to have the flex. So I'm all
process. And that's like the
philosophical aspect of that book, Deep Work, is that
there's something very human and deep
about just wrangling
with the world of ideas. I mean, Aristotle talked
about this if you go back and read the ethics.
He's trying to understand the meaning
of life and he eventually ends up ultimately
at the human capacity
to contemplate deeply.
It's kind of a teleological argument. It's the
things that only humans can do and therefore it
must be somehow connected to our ends. And he said
ultimately that's where that's where he found
his meaning. But, you know, he's touching on some
sort of intimation there. That's correct. And
so what I try to build my life around is
regularly thinking hard
about stuff that's interesting.
Just like if you get a fitness habit going,
you feel
off when you don't do it.
I try to get that cognitive habit. So it's like
I got it. I mean, look, I have my bag here
somewhere with my notebook in it because I was
thinking on the Uber ride over, I was like,
you know, I could get some, I'm working on this
new proof and it just, so you train
yourself. You train yourself to appreciate
certain things. And then over time, the hope is
that it accretes.
Well, let's talk about some demons because
I wonder, okay, this
is like Deep Work,
and the
the world without
email books that to me symbolize
the life I want
to live. Okay.
And then there is, I'm like
despite appearances
adult at this point.
And this is the life I actually live.
And
I'm in constant chaos.
You said you don't like that anxiety. I hate
it too. But it seems like
I'm always in it. It's a giant
mess. It's like
it's almost like whenever I
establish, whenever I have successful processes
for doing Deep Work, I'll add stuff
on top of it just to introduce the chaos.
Yeah. And like I don't want to.
Yeah. But you know, you have to
look in the mirror at certain point and you have
to say like, who the hell
am I? Like I keep doing this.
Is this something that's fundamental
to who I am or do I really need to fix this?
What's the chaos right now? Like I've seen
your video about like your routine. It seemed
very structured
and deep. In fact, I was really envious of it. So like
what's the chaos now that's not in that
video? Many of those sessions
go way longer. I don't get enough sleep.
Yeah. And then the
main introduction of chaos is
it's taken on too many things on the to do
list. I see.
I mean, I suppose it's a problem that everybody
deals with was just saying
not saying no. But it's not like
I have trouble saying no.
It's that there's so much cool
shit in my life. Okay, listen
there's nothing I love more in
this world than the Boston Dynamics
robots.
And they're giving me spot.
So there's nothing to do. What am I going to
say? No. So they're getting me
spot and I want to do some computer vision stuff
for the hell of it. Okay, so that's
now a to do item. And then you go to Texas
for a while and there's Texas and
everything's happening. There's all the interesting people down
there. And then there's surprises, right?
There are power outages in Texas. There's
constant changes to plans and all those kinds
of things. And you sleep less.
And then there's personal stuff like just
people in your life, sources of
stress, all those kinds of things.
But it does feel like
if I'm just being introspective
that I bring it on to
myself. I suppose a lot of people do this kind
of thing is
they
flourish under pressure.
And I wonder if that
if that's just a hack
I've developed as a habit
early on in life
that needs, you need to let go
of. You need to fix.
But it's all interesting things.
Yeah, that's interesting. Yeah, because
these are all interesting things. Well, one of
the things you talked about in deep work, which is
like really important is like having
an end to the day. Yeah.
Like putting it down. Yeah.
Like that. I don't think I've ever done
that in my life. Yeah. Well, see,
I started doing that early because
I got married early.
So, you know, I didn't have a real job. I was a grad
student, but my wife had a real job. And so
I just figured I should do my
work when she's at work
because, you know, hey, when works over
she'll be home and I don't want to be, you know,
on campus or whatever. And so
really early on I just got in that habit of
this is when, you know, this is when you
work. And then when I was a postdoc,
which is kind of an easy job, right?
I put artificial
I was like, I want to train.
I was like, when I'm a professor, it's going to be busier
because there's demands that professors have
beyond research. And so as a postdoc,
I added artificial, large time consuming
things into the middle of my day. I basically
exercised for two hours in the middle of the day
and do all this productive meditation and stuff
like this while still maintaining the nine
to five. So it's like, okay, I want to get
really good at putting artificial
constraints on so that I stay. I didn't want
to get flabby
when my job was easy so that when I became a
professor and now all of that's paying off
I have a ton of kids. So
now I don't really have a choice.
That's what's probably keeping me away from cool things
is I just don't have time to do them.
And then after a while, people, you know,
stop bothering.
Well, but that, you know, but that's how
you have a successful life. Otherwise, you're going to
it's too easy to then go into the full
Hunter as Thompson. Yeah.
Like to where no
nobody wants
nobody functional wants to be in
your vicinity. Like
you're driving, you attract the people
that
have a similar behavior
pattern as you. Yeah. So if you
if you live in chaos, you're going to attract
chaotic people. And then
it becomes like this self
fulfilling prophecy. Yeah.
And it feels like
I'm not bothered by it
but I guess this is all coming
around to exactly what you're saying, which is like
I think one of the big hacks
for productive people that I've met
is to get married
and have kids. Honestly.
It's very perhaps counterintuitive.
Yeah. But it gets
it's like the ultimate
timetable enforcer.
Yeah. It enforces a lot of timetables
though it has a huge
kids have a huge productivity hit those.
You got to weigh it. But here's the
complicated thing though. Like you could think
about in your own life starting the podcast
as one of these just cool
opportunities that you put on yourself, right?
Like, you know, I could have been talking to you at MIT
four years ago and like, don't do that.
Like your research is going well, right?
But then everyone who watches you is like, okay, this podcast
is the direction that's taking you is like a couple
of years from now.
It's going to be something really
monumental that you're probably just going to probably lead to, right?
There'll be some really
it just feels like your life is going somewhere.
It's going somewhere. It's interesting. Yeah.
Unexpected. Yeah. Yeah. So how do you balance those two
things? And so what I try to throw at it
is this this motto of do less, do better
know why, right? So do
do less, do better
know why it used to be the
motto of my website years ago.
So do a few
things but like an interesting array, right? So I
was doing MIT
stuff, but I was also writing,
you know, so a couple of things are, you know, they were
interesting. Like I have a couple bets placed
on a couple different numbers on the roulette table,
but not too many things.
And then really try to do those things really well and
see where it goes. Like with my writing, I just spent years
and years and years just trained like I want to be a better
writer, want to be a better writer. I started writing student
books when I was a student.
I really wanted to write hardcover idea books. I started
training. I would I would use like New Yorker
articles to train myself.
I'd break them down and then I'd get commissions with
much smaller magazines and practice the skills
and I took forever until, you know,
but now today, like I actually get a right for the New
Yorker, but it took like a decade.
So a small number of things tried to do them really well
and then the know why is have a connection to
some sort of value. Like in general, I think
this is worth doing and then
seen where it leads.
And so the choice of the few things
is grounded in what like a little
like a little flame of
passion, like a love for the thing, like a sense
that you say you wanted to write
get good at writing.
You had that kind of introspective
moment of thinking this actually brings me a lot
of joy and fulfillment.
Yeah, I mean, it gets complicated because I wrote
a whole book about following your passion being
bad advice, which is like the first thing
I kind of got infamous for.
I wrote that back in 2012.
But the argument there is like
passion cultivates, right?
So what I was pushing back on
was to myth that the passion
for what you do exists full
intensity before you start.
And then that's what propels you.
Where actually the reality is as you get better
at something, as you gain more autonomy, more skill
and more impact, a passion grows along with it.
So that when people look back
later and say, oh, follow your passion,
what they really mean is I'm very passionate
about what I do and that's a worthy goal.
But how you actually cultivate that
is much more complicated than just introspection
is going to identify, like for sure
you should be a writer or something like this.
So I was actually quoting you.
I was on a social network last night
in a clubhouse.
I don't know if you've heard of it.
I have to ask you about this because I was
invited to do a clubhouse. I don't know what that means.
A tech reporter
has invited me to do a clubhouse about my new book.
That's awesome.
Well, let me know when because I'll show up.
But what is it? Okay.
So first of all, let me just mention that I was
in a clubhouse room
last night and I kept plugging
exactly what you said about
passion. So we'll talk about it.
It was a room that was focused on burnout.
Okay.
But first, clubhouse
is a kind of fascinating place
in terms of your mind
would be very interesting to analyze this place
because
we talk about email,
we talk about social networks,
but clubhouse is something very different
and I've encountered it in other places,
Discord, and so on.
That's voice only communication.
So it's a bunch of people in a room.
They're just eyes closed.
All you hear is their voices.
Real time.
Live. It only happens live.
You're technically not allowed to record,
but some people still do,
big conversations,
but the whole point is it's there live.
And there's different structures. Like on Discord,
it was so fascinating.
I have this Discord server
that would have hundreds of people
in a room together.
We're all just little icons that can mute
and unmute our mics.
So you're sitting there,
so it's just voices,
and you're able with hundreds of people
to
not interrupt each other.
But first of all, as a dynamic system,
you see icons
just like mics muted or not muted basically.
So everyone's muted and they
unmute and it starts flashing.
So you're like, okay, let me
get precedence.
So it's the digital equivalent of when you're
in a conversation at a faculty meeting
and you sort of
make some noises while the other person's
finishing and so people realize, okay,
this person wants to talk next, but now it's
purely digital. You see a flashing.
Faculty meeting, which is very interesting,
even as we're talking now,
there's a visual element
that seems to increase the probability
of interruption.
When it's just darkness,
you actually listen better
and you don't interrupt.
So if you create a culture, there's always
going to be assholes, but they're
actually exceptions.
Everybody adjusts, they kind of evolve
to the beat of the room.
Okay, that's one fascinating
aspect. It's like, okay, that's weird
because it's different than like a zoom
call where there's video.
It's just audio.
You think video adds,
but it actually seems like it subtracts.
The second aspect of it
that's fascinating is when it's no
video, just audio,
there's an intimacy.
It's weird.
With strangers,
you connect
in a much more real way.
You go to podcasts.
With a lot of people.
With a lot of people and new people.
And they bring,
okay, first of all, different voices,
like low voices and like
high voices.
It's more difficult to judge.
In Discord, you couldn't even see
it was a culture where you do funny
profile pictures as opposed
to your actual face.
In Clubhouse, it's your actual face.
You're an older person, younger person.
In Discord, you couldn't. You just have to judge
based on the voice.
But there's
something about the listening
and the intimacy of
being surprised by different strangers.
It feels almost like
a party with friends
and friends of friends you haven't met yet,
but you really like.
Now Clubhouse also has an interesting
innovation where there's a large crowd
that just listens and there's a stage.
And you can bring people up on the stage.
So only people on stage are talking.
And you can have
like five, six, seven, eight, sometimes 20,
30 people on stage. And then you can also
have thousands of people just listening.
So there's a,
I don't know, a lot of people are being surprised
by this. Why is it called a social network?
It seems like it doesn't have, there's not social links.
There's not a feed that's trying
to harvest attention. It feels like a
communication.
So the social network
aspect is you follow people.
And the people you follow,
now this is like the first social network that's
actually correct use of follow, I think,
you're more likely to see
the rooms they're in. So there's a, your
feed is a bunch of rooms that are going on right
now. And
the people you follow
are the ones that will increase
the likelihood that you'll see the room they're in.
And so the final result
is like, there's a list of really interesting
rooms. Like
I've always, I've been speaking Russian
quite a bit. There's practicing
but also just like talking politics
and philosophy in Russian.
I've never done that before, but it allows me to connect
with that community. And then
there's a community of
like, it's funny, but like
I'll go in a community of all African
American people talking about race
and I'll be welcomed. Yeah.
I've never had, like I've literally never
been in a difficult conversation
about race
like with people from all over the place
it's like fascinating.
Musicians, jazz musicians, I don't
know. You could say that a lot of other
places could have created that culture, I suppose
Twitter and Facebook
a lot for that culture, but there's something about
this network because it stands
now, because
no Android users.
It's probably just because it's iPhone people.
Yeah. It's less inspiratory
or something. Well, like less, listen
I'm an Android person, so I got
an iPhone just for this network. This is funny.
Yeah.
For now it's all like
there's very few trolls. Yeah.
There's very few people that are trying to manipulate
the system and so on. So I don't know
it's interesting. Now the downside
the reason you're going to hate it
is
because it's so intimate, because it pulls you in
and pulls in very successful people
like you just
like really successful
productive, very busy people
it
it's a huge time sink. It's very difficult
to pull yourself out.
You mean once you're in a room? Well no, leaving
the room is actually easy. The beautiful
thing about a stage with multiple people
there's actually a little button that says
leave quietly. Okay.
So culture, no, etiquette
wise, it's okay to just leave.
Yeah. So you and I in a room
when it's just you and I, it's a little awkward to leave.
If you're asking questions and I'm just gone. Yeah.
But and actually if you're being interviewed
for the book
that's weird because you're now
in the event and you're supposed to
but usually the person interviewing
would be like okay it's time for you to go
it's more normal but the
normal way to use the room
it's like you're just opening the app
and there'll be like I don't know
Sam Harris
Eric
Weinstein
I think Joe Rogan showed up to the app
Bill Gates, these people on stage
just like randomly just plugged in
and then you'll step up on stage
listen maybe you won't contribute
at all, maybe you'll say something funny
and then you'll just leave and there's
the
addicting aspect to it, the reason it's a time sink
is you don't want to leave.
What I've noticed about exceptionally busy people
that they
love this, I think
might have to do with the pandemic
there's a loneliness
but also it's really cool people
when
was the last time you talked to Sam Harris
or whoever, think of
anybody
any faculty
this is like what universities strive
to create but it's taken
cultural evolution and trying to get
a lot of interesting smart people together that run into each other
we have really strong
faculty in a room
together with no scheduling
and this is the power of it
it's like you just show up
there's none of that baggage of scheduling and so on
and there's no pressure to leave
no pressure to stay
it's very easy for you to leave
you realize that there's a lot of constraints on meetings
and like faculty
even stopping by
before the pandemic
a friend or faculty or colleague and so on
there's a weirdness about leaving
but here
there's not a weirdness about leaving
you discover something interesting
but the final result when you
observe it
it's very fulfilling
I think it's very beneficial
but it's very addicting
so you have to make sure you
moderate
that's interesting
maybe I'll try it
the things that make me suspicious about other platforms
aren't here
the feed is not full of
user generated content
it's a rating process with all the weird incentives
and nudging that does
and you're not producing content that's being harvested
to be monetized
by another company
it seems like it's more
ephemeral
the feed is just actually just showing you
here's interesting things happening
you're not jockeying in the feed for
look I'm being clever or something
and I'm going to get a light count that goes up
and that's going to influence
and there's more friction
between listening to smart people
versus scrolling through
there's something there
there's all these articles
that seem, I haven't really read them
but why are reporters negative about this
competition
the New York Times wrote this article called
unfettered conversations happening on clubhouse
is
I'm right in picking up a tone
even from the headlines that there's some negative
vibes from the press
so I can say
well I'll tell you what the article was saying
which is
they're having
cancelable conversations
the biggest people in the world almost trolling
the press
and the press is desperate
by saying
that you guys are looking for clickbait
from our genuine human conversations
and so
I think
honestly the press is just like
what do we do with this
first of all it's a lot of work
okay
it's what Naval says which is like
this is skipping the journalist
like the interview you
if you go on clubhouse the interview you might do
for the book
will be with somebody who's like a journalist
interviewing you
that's more traditional
it'll be a good introduction for you to try it
but the way to use clubhouse
is you just show up
and it's like
again like me
I keep
mentioning Sam Harris as if it's like the only person I know
but like a lot of these
major faculty I don't know
max tag mark
major faculty just sitting there and then you show
up and then
I'll ask like oh don't you have a book coming out
or something and then you'll talk about
the book and then you'll leave five minutes later because you have to go get coffee
including that
so like that's the
it's not the journalist that you're not going to actually
enjoy the interview as much
because it'll be like the normal thing
like you're there
40 minutes or an hour and there'll be questions from the audience
right like I'm doing an event
next week for the book launch
where it's like Jason Fried and I are
talking about email
but it's using some more like a thousand
people who are there to watch virtually
but it's using some sort of traditional webinar
clubhouse would be a situation
where that could just happen informally
like I jump in like Jason's there and then someone else jumps in
and yeah that's interesting
but for now it's still closed
so even though there's a lot of excitement
and there'll be
quite famous people just sitting there
listening to you
but the numbers aren't exactly
high so you're talking about rooms
like even the huge rooms are like
just a few thousand
and this is probably like Soho in the 50s
or something too just because of the
exponential growth
give it seven more months and
one invite begets two invites begets four
invites begetting pretty soon it'll be
everyone and then the rooms in your feed are going to be
whatever
marketing performance enhancing drugs or something like that
but then and a bunch of competitors
there's already like 30 plus
competitors sprung up twitter spaces
so twitter is creating a competitor
that's going to likely destroy clubhouse
because they just have a much larger user base
and they already have a social network
so I
I would be very cautious of course
with the addictive element but it doesn't
just like you said this particular
implementation in its early stages
doesn't have the like
the
it doesn't have the context switching problem
you'll just switch to it and you'll be stuck
yeah the keep a context is great
yeah
and but then I think the best way
I've found to use it is
to acknowledge that these things
pull you in
I've used it in the past
like almost
you know I'll go get a coffee and I'll tune into a conversation
as if that's how I use podcast sometimes
I'll just like play a little bit of a podcast
and then
you know I can just turn it off the problem
with these is it pulls you in it's really
interesting and then the other problem that you'll
experience is like
somebody will recognize you
and then they'll be like oh lex
come on up
hey I had a question for you
and then it takes a lot for you to go
like to to ignore that
yeah yeah so yeah and then you pulled
in and it's fascinating and it's really cool
people so it's like a source of a lot of joy
but it is
you have to be very very careful
the reason I brought it up is we
there's a room just an entire club
actually on burnout
and
I brought you up and I brought David
Goggins is the process I go through
because
my passion goes up and down
it dips
and I don't think I trust my own mind
to
tell me
whether I'm getting close to burnout or exhaustion
or not
I kind of go with the David Goggins model of
I mean he's probably more applying it
to running but
when it feels like your mind can't take
anymore
that you're just 40%
your capacity
I mean it's just like an arbitrary level
it's the Navy SEAL thing
I mean you could put that at any percent
but it is remarkable that
if you just take it one step at a time
just keep going
it's similar to this idea of a process
if you just trust the process and you just keep following
even if the passion goes up and down
and so on
then ultimately
if you look in aggregate
the passion will increase
and if you have two things
this has been a big strategy of mine
what you hope for is off phase
off phase alignment
sometimes it's in phase and that's a problem
but off phase alignment is good
so okay
my research I'm struggling
my book stuff is going well
and so when you add those two waves together
we're doing pretty well and then
in other periods like on my writing
I feel like I'm just not getting anywhere
but I've had some good papers
that can counteract each other
now sometimes they fall into sync
and then it gets rough
because everything for me is cyclical
good periods, bad periods with all this stuff
so typically they don't coincide
so it helps compensate
when they do coincide you get really high highs
like where everything is clicking
and then you get these really low lows
where your research is not working
your program is not clicking
you feel like you're nowhere with your writing
and then it's a little rougher
do you think about the concept of burnout
because I personally have never experienced burnout
in the way that folks talk about
which is
it's not just the up and down
it's like you don't want to do anything
ever again
for some people it's like physical
to the hospital kind of thing
so I do worry about it
so when I used to do
student writing like writing about students
or student advice
it came up a lot with students at elite schools
and I used to call it deep procrastination
but it's a real
really vivid, very replicatable
syndrome where they
stop being able to do schoolwork
like this is due
and the professor gives you an extension
and the professor gives you an incomplete
and says we're going to fail the course
you have to hand this in and they can't do it
it's like a complete stop
on the ability to actually do work
so I used to counsel students who had that issue
and often it was a combination of
just analysis
you have just the physical and cognitive difficulties
they're usually under a very hard load
they're doing too many majors, too many extracurriculars
just really pushing themselves
and the motivation
is not sufficiently intrinsic
so if you have a motivational center
that's not completely on board so a lot of these kids
like when I'm dealing with MIT kids
their whole town was shooting off fireworks
that they got in
everyone's hoped that they were going there
and that they're in three majors
and they're really interested in being a doctor or whatever
so your motivation is not in the right place
the motivational psychologist would say
the locus of control was more towards the extrinsic
end of the spectrum
and you have hardship
and you could just fritz out the whole system
and so I would always be very worried about that
so I think about that a lot
I do a lot of multi phase
or multi scale seasonality
so I'll go hard on something for a while
and then for a few weeks go easy
I'll have semesters that are hard
so on multiple scales and in the day
I'll go really hard on something but then have a hard cut off at five
so like every scale
it's all about rest and recovery
because I really want to avoid that and I do burn out
I burnt out pretty recently
I get minor burnt out
I had a couple of papers
that I was trying to work through for a deadline
a few weeks ago
and I wasn't sleeping well
and there's some other things going on
and it just knocks out
and I get sick usually is how I know I've pushed myself too far
and so I kind of pull it back
now I'm doing this book launch
then after this book launch I'm pulling it back again
so I like seasonality for rest and recovery
I think it's crucial and at every scale
daily, monthly
and then at the annual scale
an easy summer for example
I think it's like a great idea if that's possible
you just made me realize
that's exactly what I do
because I feel like I'm not even close to burn out
or anything even though I'm in chaos
I feel
the right exact ways of seasonality
is the
not even the seasonality but like
you always have multiple seasons
operating it's like you said
because when you have a lot of cool shit going on
there's always at least one thing
that's a source of joy
that there's always a reason
I suppose the fundamental thing
and I've known people that suffer
from depression too
the fundamental problem with the experience
of depression and burnout
is like why do
life is meaningless
and I always have an answer
of like why
why today could be cool
and you have to contrive it
if you don't have it, you have to contrive it
I think it's really important
like okay well this is going bad
so now is the time to start thinking about
look I started a podcast during the pandemic
it's like this is going pretty bad
but you know what this could be something
really interesting
deep questions with Kyle Newport
and I do it all in that voice
I love the podcast by the way
but yeah I think David Foster Wallace said
the key to life is to be
unboreable
I've always kind of taken that to heart
which is like
you should be able to maybe artificially
generate anything
like
find something
in your environment
in your surroundings that's a source of joy
like everything is fun
did you read The Pale King
that goes deep on boredom
it's like uncomfortable
it's like an uncomfortable meditation on boredom
the characters in that are just driven
to the extremes of
I just bought three books on boredom
the other day
so now I'm really interested in this topic
because I was anxious about my book launch
happening this week so I was like okay I need something else
so I have this idea for
an article first but as a book
okay I need something cool
to be thinking about because I was worried about
the launch going to work
the pandemic what's going to happen
so this is exactly what we're talking about
so I went out and I bought a bunch of books
and I'm beginning like a whole
sort of intellectual exploration
well I think that's one of the profound
ideas in deep work
that you don't expand on
too much as boredom
yeah well so
deep work had a superficial idea
about boredom which was
I had this chapter called embrace boredom
a very functionalist idea
was basically
you have to have some boredom in your regular schedule
or your mind is going to form a Pavlovian connection
between as soon as
I feel boredom I get stimuli
and once it forms that connection it's never going to tolerate deep work
so there's this very pragmatic
treatment of boredom
of your mind better be used
to the idea that sometimes you don't get stimuli
because otherwise you can't write for three hours
like it's just not going to tolerate it
but more recently what I'm really interested in boredom
is it as a fundamental human drive
right because it's
incredibly uncomfortable
and think about the other things that are incredibly uncomfortable
like hunger or thirst
they serve a really important purpose
for a species right like if something is really
distressing there's a reason pain is really uncomfortable
because we need to worry about getting injured
thirst is really uncomfortable because
we need water to survive
boredom why is that uncomfortable
and I've been
interested in this notion that
boredom is about
driving us towards
productive action
like as a species I mean think about it
what got us to actually take advantage of these
brains what got us to actually
work with fire what got us to start shaping
stones and the hand axes
and figuring out if we could actually sharpen a stick
sharpen after we could throw it as a
melee weapon or a distance weapon
mammoth right boredom
drives us towards action
so now I'm fascinated by this fundamental action
instinct because I have this
theory that I'm working on that
we're out of sync with it
just like we got we have this drive for hunger
but then we introduce junk food and got out of sync with hunger
and it makes us really unhealthy
we have this drive towards action but then we
overload ourselves and we have all
of these distractions and then that causes
it's like a cognitive
action obesity type things because it short
circuits this system that wants us to do things
but we put more things in our plate than we can possibly do
and then we're really frustrated we can't do them
and we're short circling all of our wires so it all comes back
to this question
well what would be the ideal
the ideal
sort of amount of stuff to do and type of things to do
like if we wanted to look back at our ancestral
environment and say
if I could just build from scratch
what type how much work I do and what I work on
to be as in touch with that as like
paleo people are trying to get their diets in touch with that
and so now I'm just
it's something I made up
but now I'm going deep on it
and one of my podcast listeners I was talking about
on the show and I was like
trying to learn about animals and boredom and she sent
me this cool article from an animal behaviorist
journal about what we know about
human boredom versus animal boredom
so trying to figure out that puzzle
is the wave that's high
so I can get through the wave that's low
like I don't know about this pandemic book launch
and my research
my research is stumbling a little bit because of the pandemic
and so I needed a
nice you know high so there we go
there's a case study
well it's both a case study and
a very interesting set of concepts because I didn't even realize
that it's so simple
I'm one of the people
that
has an interesting push and pull
dynamic with hunger trying to understand the hunger
with myself like I probably
have a non healthy relationship with food
I don't know
there's probably a perfect
that's a nice way to think about
diet as action
there's probably an
optimal diet response
to the
experience that our body is telling us
the signal that our body is sending
which is hunger and in that same way
boredom is sending a signal
and most of our intellectual
activities in this world
our creative activities are
essentially a response
to that
signal
and think about this analogy
that we have this hunger instinct that junk food
short circuits
we'll satisfy that hyper
palatably and it doesn't end up well
now think about modern
attention engineered
digitally mediated entertainment
we have this boredom instinct
we can take care of that
with a hyper palatable alternative
is that going to lead to a similar problem
so I've been fasting a lot lately
like I'm doing
eating once a day
I've been doing that for over a month
just eating one meal a day
and primarily meat
but it's very
fasting has been incredible
for me for focus
for well being
just for feeling good
we'll put on a chart what makes me feel good
and
that fasting and eating primarily
this diet makes me feel really good
and so
but that ultimately
what fasting did
I haven't fasted super long yet like a seven day
diet which I really would like to do
but even just fasting for a day for 24 hours
gets you
in touch with your
with this signal
it's fascinating like you get to
learn to listen to your body
that like
it's okay to be hungry
it's a little signal that sends you stuff
and then I get to
listen to how it responds
when I put food
in my body
and I get to like okay
cool so like food is a thing
that pacifies the signal
it sounds ridiculous okay
and do different types of food
it feels different so you learn about what your body
wants
for some reason fasting
it's similar to the deep work
of the body's boredom
fasting allowed me to go into
mode of listening of trying to understand the signal
that I could say
I have an unhealthy
appreciation of fruit okay
I love apples and cherries
like I don't know how to moderate them
so if you take just same amount of calories
I don't know calories matter but
say say calories 2,000 calories of cherries
versus 2,000
calories of steak
if I eat 2,000 calories of steak
a little bit of like green beans
cauliflower I'm going to feel
really good
fulfilled, focused and happy
if I eat cherries I'm going to be
I'm going to wake up behind a dumpster
crying with like
naked and like it's just
with everything
and it's just like bloated
just not and unhappy
and also the mood
swings up and down I don't know
and I'll be
much hungrier the next day
sometimes it takes a couple days
but when I introduce carbs into the system
too many carbs
it starts it's just
unhealthy I go into this roller coaster
as opposed to a calm boat ride
along the river and the Amazon or something like that
so fasting was the
mechanism for me to start
listening to the body
I wonder if you can do that same kind
I guess that's what meditation a little bit is
a little bit but listen the boredom
but so two years ago I had a book out called
digital minimalism and one of the
things I was recommending that people do
is basically a 30 day fast
but from digital personal
entertainment social media online videos
anything that captures
your attention and dispels boredom
and people were thinking like
oh this is a detox like I just want
to teach your body not to need the
distraction or this or that but it really wasn't what I was interested in
I wanted there to be
space that you could
listen to your boredom
okay I can't just dispel it I can't just look at the screen
and revel in it a little bit
and start to listen to it and say what is this really
pushing me towards
and you take the new stuff the new technology
off the table and sort of ask what is this
what am I craving like what's the
activity equivalent of
2000 calories of meat with a little bit of
green beans on the side and I had
1700 people go through this experiment like spend
30 days doing this and it's hard at first
but then they get used to listening
to themselves and sort of seeking out what is
this really pushing me towards and it was pushing
people towards connection
was pushing people towards I just want to
go be around other people it was pushing
people towards high quality
leisure activities like I want to go
do something that's complicated and it took
weeks sometimes for them to get in touch with their boredom
but then it completely
rewired how they thought
about what do I want to do with my time outside
of work and then the idea is when you're done with that
then it was much easier to go back and completely
change your digital life because
you have alternatives right you're not just trying
to abstain from things you don't like but
that's basically a listening to boredom
experiment like just be there with the boredom
and see where it drives you
when you don't have you know the digital
cheesets okay so if I can't do that
where is it going to drive me well I guess
I kind of want to go to the library which
came up a lot by the way a lot of people rediscovered
the library you know with physical books
physical books like you can just go borrow
them and like it there's like low pressure
and you can explore and you bring them home
and then you read them and you can like sit by the window
and read them and it's nice weather outside and I used
to do that 20 years ago they're listening
to boredom. So can you maybe
elaborate a little bit on the different
experiences that people had when they quit
social media for 30 days like is that
if you were to recommend that process
what is ultimately
the goal? Yeah digital
minimalism that's my philosophy
for all this tech
and it's working backwards from what's important
so it's you figure out
what you're actually all about like what you want to do
what you want to spend your time doing and
then you can ask okay is there a place
that tech can amplify or support some of these things
and that's how you decide what tech to use
and so the the process
is let's actually get away from everything
let's be bored for a while let's let's really
spend a month getting really figuring out what do I
actually want to do what I want to spend my time
doing what's important to me you know what makes
me feel good and then when you're done you can bring back
in tech very strategically to help those things
and that was the goal
that turns out to be much more successful than
when people take a
abstention only approach
so if you come at your tech life
and say you know whatever I look at
Instagram too much like I don't like how much on
Instagram that's a bad thing
I want to reduce this bad thing so here's my new
thing I'm going to spend less time looking at Instagram
much less likely to succeed in the long term
so we're much less likely
at trying to reduce this sort of amorphous
negative because you know in the moment
it's not that bad and would be kind of interesting
to look at it now when you're instead controlling
behavior because you have a positive that you're
aiming towards it's very powerful for people like I want
my life to be like this
here's the role that tech plays in that life
the connection to wanting
your life to be like that is very very strong
and then it's much much easier to say yeah like
using Instagram is not part of my plan for how I
have that life and I really want to have that life so of course
I'm not going to use Instagram so it turns out to be a much
more sustainable way to
tame what's going on so if you quit
social media for 30 days you kind of have to
do the work
yes to do the work of thinking like
what am I actually what makes
me happy in terms of these tools that I've
previously used and
when you try to integrate them back
how can they integrate them
to maximize the thing they actually
what makes me happy unrelated to technology
like what do I actually what do I want my life
to be like well maybe what I want to do is be
outside in nature two hours a day and spend a lot more time
like helping my community and sacrificing on behalf
of my connections and then have
some sort of intellectually engaging
leisure activity like I'm reading
or trying to read the great books and having more
calm and seeing the sunset you
you create this picture
and then you go back and say well I still need my
Facebook group because that's how I keep up
with my cycling group but
Twitter is just you know toxics on helping
any of these things and well I'm an artist so
I kind of need Instagram to get inspiration
but if I know that's why I'm using Instagram
I don't need it on my phone it's just on my computer
and I just follow ten artists and check it once a week
like you really can start to
it was the number one thing that differentiated
in that experiment the people who ended up
sustainably making changes
and getting through the 30 days and those who didn't
was the people who did the experimentation
and the reflection like let me try to figure out
what's positive they were much
more successful than the people that just said
I'm sick of using my phone so much
so I'm just gonna white knuckle it just 30 days will be good
for me I just gotta just gotta get away from it
or something it doesn't last
so you don't use social media currently
do you find that a lot of people
going through this process
will
will seek to basically arrive
at a similar place to not use
social media primarily? About half
right so about half when they went
through this exercise and these aren't
quantified numbers you know this is just
they sent me reports and yeah
that's pretty good though so 1700
yeah yeah so so so roughly
half probably got rid
of social media altogether once they did this exercise
they realized these things I care about
I don't social media is not the tools
that's really helping the other half
kept some there are some things
in their life or some social media was useful
but the key thing is if they knew
why they were deploying social media
they could put fences around it
so for example of those half that kept
some social media almost none of them kept it on
their phone oh interesting
yeah I can't optimize if you if you don't know
what it is the function you're trying to optimize so it's like this
huge hack like once you know this is why I'm using
Twitter then you can have a lot of rules
about how you use Twitter and suddenly
you take this cost benefit ratio and it goes
like way from the company's advantage
and way over towards your advantage it's
kind of fascinating because I've been
torn with social media but I did this kind
of process I haven't actually done it for 30
days which I probably should
I'll do it for like a week at a time and regularly
and thinking what
kind of approach
to Twitter works for me
what I'm
distinctly aware of the fact
that I really enjoy
posting once or twice a day
and at that time
checking from the previous post
it like it makes me feel
even when there's like
negative comments they go
right past me and when there's positive
comments makes you smile I feel like love
and connection with people
especially people I know but even just in
general it's like makes me feel like the world
is full of awesome people
okay when you increase that from
checking from two to like
I don't know what the threshold is for me but probably
like five or six per day
it starts going to anxiety world
like where negative comments will
actually stick to me
might mentally
and positive comments
will feel more shallow
yeah yeah it's kind
of fascinating so I
I've been trying
to there's been long stretches of time
I think
December and January where I did just
post and check post and check
that was that makes me
really happy most of
2020 I did that made me really happy
recently I started
like I'll go you know
you go right back in like a drug addict
will you check it like I don't know what
that number is but that number is high
you don't come out happy no one
comes out of a day full of Twitter
celebrating humanity and it's
not even because I'm very
fortunate to have a lot of just the positivity
might the Twitter but I
there's just a general anxiety
I wouldn't even say
I wouldn't even say it's
probably the thing that you're talking about with the context
switching it's almost like
an exhaustion
I wouldn't even say it's like a negative feeling
it's almost just an exhaustion to where
I'm not creating anything beautiful in my
yeah life just exhausted
existential exhaustion existential
exhaustion but I wonder do you think
it's possible to use from the people
you've seen from yourself
to use social media in the way
I'm describing moderation or is it always
going to become
when people do this exercise you get lots of
lots of configurations
so for people that have
a public presence for example
like what you're doing is not that not that unusual
okay I post
one thing a day and my audience likes it
and that's kind of it
but you thought through like okay
this supports something I value which is like having a sort of
informal connection with my audience
and being exposed
to some sort of
positive randomness
okay that's my goal
what's the right way to do it well I don't need
to be on Twitter on my phone all day maybe what I do is
every day at five I do my post
and check on the day
so I have a writer friend
Ryan Holiday who writes about the Stoics
a lot and he has this
similar strategy he post one
quote every day from
usually from a famous Stoic and sometimes from a contemporary figure
and that's just what he does he just
post it and it's a very positive thing
like his readers really love it because it's just like a dose
of inspiration he doesn't spend time
he's never interacting with anyone on
social media right but that's an example
of I figured out what's important to me
what's the best way to use tools to amplify it
and then you get advantages out of the tools
so like I like what you're doing
I looked you up I looked up your Twitter feed
before I came over here I was curious
you're not on there a lot
I don't see you yelling at people
do you think social media as a medium
changed the cultural standards
and I mean it in a have you read Neil Postman
at all have you read like a amusing ourselves to death
he was a social critic technology
critic and wrote a lot
about sort of technological determinism
so the ways which is
a really influential idea to a lot of my work
which is actually a little out of fashion right now in academia but
the ways that the properties
and presence of technologies
change things about humans in a way that's
not really intended or planned by the humans themselves
and he is that that book is all about how
different communication medium
like fundamentally just changed the way the human brain
understands and operates
and so he sort of gets into the what happened
when the printed word was widespread
and how television changed it and this was all
pre social media
but this one of these ideas I'm having is like what
to the degree to which I get into it sometimes
I show again to a little bit like the degree to which
like Twitter in particular
just changed the way that people conceptualized
what for example
debate and discussion was
like it introduced a rhetorical dunk culture
or sort of more about
tribes not giving ground to other tribes
and and it's like it's a complete
there's different places and times
when that type of discussion
with thought of differently right
well yeah absolutely but I
I tend to believe I don't know what you think that
there's the technological solutions like
there's literally different
features in Twitter
that could completely reverse that there's so
much power in the different
choices that are made and
it could still be highly engaging
and have very different effects perhaps
more negative but or hopefully more positive
yeah so I'm trying to pull these
two things apart so there's these
two ways social media let's say could
change the experience of reading a
major newspaper today one could be
a little bit more economic right so
the internet made it cheaper to get news
the newspapers had to retreat to a paywall model
because it was the only way they were going to survive
but once you're in a paywall model then
what you really want to do is make your tribe
which is within the paywall very very happy
with you so you want to work to them but then
there's the sort of the determinist point of view
which is the properties of Twitter which were arbitrary
Jack and Evan just
whatever let's just do it this way
influence the very way that people now
understand and think about the world
influence the other I think yeah they
they kind of started adjusting together
I did this thing I mean
I'm trying to understand this part of the
part of the
I've been playing with the entrepreneurial
idea there's a very particular
dream I've had of a startup
that this is a longer
term thing with has to do with
artificial intelligence but
more and more it seems like there's a
some trajectory through creating
social media
that type of technology is very different
than what people are thinking I'm doing but
it's a kind of challenge
to the way the
Twitter is done but
it's not obvious what the best mechanisms
are to still make an exceptionally
engaging platform
my clubhouse is very engaging
and not have any other negative effects
I for example there's
Chrome extensions that allow
you to turn off
all likes and dislikes and all
that from Twitter so all you're seeing
is just the content
on Twitter that to me
creates that's not a compelling
experience at all because I still
need
I would argue I still need the likes
to know what's a tweet worth reading
because I don't only have a limited amount of time
so I need to know what's valuable
it's like great Yelp reviews on tweets
but I've turned
off on
for example on my account on YouTube
I've
I wrote a Chrome extension that
turns off all likes
and dislikes and just views
I don't know how many views the video gets
and so on unless it's on my phone
do you take off the recommendations
the
YouTube some people the distraction for
YouTube is a big one for people
no I'm not worried about the distraction
because I'm able to control myself
on YouTube you don't rabbit hole
I don't rabbit hole so you have to know your
demons or your addictions whatever
on YouTube I'm okay I don't have I don't keep clicking
the negative
feelings come from seeing
the views on
stuff you've created
so you don't want to see your views
yeah I'm just like
speaking to the things that I'm aware of of myself
that are helpful and things
that are not helpful emotionally
and I feel like there should be
we need to create actually tooling for
ourselves that's not me
with JavaScript but anybody
is able to create
sort of control the experience
that they have yeah well
so my my big unified theory
on social media is I'm very I'm very bearish
yes on the big platforms
having a long future you are
I think the moment I think the moment
of three or four major platforms
is
knock on the last right so
I don't know okay this is just perspective right so you
can start shorting these stocks
on my don't tell me
yeah yeah don't do Robin hood
so here's here's I think the
the big mistake the major platforms made
as when they
they took out the network effect
advantage right so the original
pitch especially if something like Facebook
or Instagram was the people
you know are on here
right so like what you use this for you can connect
to people that you already know this is what
makes the network useful we so therefore
the value of our network grows
quadratically with the number of users and therefore
it's such a head start that there's
no way that someone else can catch up
but when they shifted and when Facebook
took to lead of say we're going to shift towards
a newsfeed model they basically
said we're going to try to in the moment
get more data and get more likes
like what we're going to go towards is actually just
seen interesting stuff
like seen diverting information so people took
this social internet impulse
to connect to people digitally to other tools
like group text messages and what's
happened stuff like this right so you don't think
about these tools as oh this is where I connect
with people once it's just a feed that's kind
of interesting now you're competing
with everything else that can produce interesting
content that's diverting I think that is
a much fiercer competition
because now for example you're going up against
podcast right I mean like okay I guess
you know the Twitter feed is interesting right
now but also a podcast is interesting
or something else could be interesting too I
think it's a much fiercer competition when
there's no there's no more network effects
and so my sense is we're going to see a
fragmentation into what I call long tail
social media where if I don't need
everyone I know to be on a
platform then why not have
three or four bespoke platforms I use
where it's a thousand people and it's all
we're all interested in you know whatever
AI or comedy and
we've perfected this interface
and maybe it's like clubhouse it's audio or
something and we all pay two dollars so we
don't have to worry about attention harvesting
and that's going to be wildly more entertaining
and I'm thinking about comedians on Twitter
it's not the best
internet possible format
for them expressing themselves and being
interesting that you have all these comedians that are trying to
like well I can do like little clips and little whatever
like I don't know if there was a
long tail social media and it's really this is where the comedians
are and this podcast and the comedians are on
podcast now so this is my thought is that there's
really no
there's really no strong advantage to having
one large
platform this everyone is on
and if all you're getting from it is I now have
different options for diversion and
like uplifting aspirational or whatever types
entertainment that whole thing could fragment
and I think the glue that was holding together
was network effects and I don't think they realized
that when network effects have been destabilized
they don't have the centrifugal force anymore
and they're spinning faster and faster but is
a Twitter feed really that much more
interesting than all these streaming services
is it really that much more interesting
than clubhouse is it that much more
interesting than podcast
I feel like they don't realize how unstable
their ground actually is yeah that's fascinating
but
the thing that makes
Twitter and Facebook work
I mean the news feed
you're exactly right like you can just duplicate
the news like if it's
not the social network and it's the news feed
then why not have multiple different
feeds that are more
that are better at satisfying there's a
dopamine gamification that they've figured out
yeah the end
so you have to whatever you create
you have to at least provide
some pleasure in that same gamification
kind of way it doesn't
have to have to do with scale
of large social networks but I mean
I guess you're implying that
you should be able to design that kind of
mechanism in other forms
or people are turning on that gamification
I mean so people are getting wise to it
and are getting uncomfortable about it right
so if I'm offering something
these exist out here
they realize sugar is bad to you
they're going to stop eating
drinking a lot is great too but also after a while
you realize there's problems
some of the long tail social media networks
that are out there that I've looked at
they offer usually like a deeper sense
of connection like it's usually
interesting people that you share some affinity
and you have these carefully cultivated
I wrote this New Yorker piece a couple years ago
about the indie social media movement that really
got into some of these different
technologies but I think the technologies
on you know, Macedon versus
whatever like forget or discord
actually let's forget the protocols right now it's the idea
of okay
and there's a lot of these long tail social media
groups what people are getting out of it which I think
can outweigh the dopamine
gamification is strong
connection and motivation like you're in a group
with other guys that are all trying to
be you know better dads or something like
this and you talk to them on a regular
basis and you're sharing your stories and there's
interesting talks and that's a
powerful thing too. One interesting thing
about scale of Twitter is
you have these viral spread of information
so sort of
Twitter has become a newsmaker
in itself. Yeah, I think it's a problem.
Well yes but I don't wonder what
replaces that because
because then you immediately
one of the reporters would have to do
some work again I don't know. The problem with reporters
and journalism is that
they're intermediary
they have control
I mean this is the problem in Russia currently
is that you have
it creates a shield
between the people and the news
the interesting thing and the powerful thing
about Twitter is that
the news originates from the individual
that's creating the news like
you have the president of the United States
the former president of the United States on Twitter
creating news you have
Elon Musk creating news you have people
announcing stuff on Twitter
as opposed to talking to a journalist
it feels much more genuine
and
it feels very powerful
but actually coming to realize
it doesn't need the social
network you can just put that
announcement on a YouTube type thing.
This is what I'm thinking right so this is my point about that
because that's right the democratizing power
of the internet is fantastic
I'm an old school internet nerd
a guy that was you know
telemediting in the servers and gophering before
the World Wide Web was around right so I'm a huge internet booster
and that's one of its big power
but when you put everything on Twitter
I think the fact that you've taken
you homogenized everything
right so everything looks the same
moves with the same low friction is very difficult
you have know what I call distributed curation
right the only curation that
really happens there's a little bit with likes
and also the algorithm but if you look back
to pre Web 2.0
or early Web 2.0 when a lot
of this was happening let's say on blogs
where people own their own servers and you had your different
blogs there was this distributed
curation that happened where in order
for your blog to
get on people's radar and this had nothing
to do with any gatekeepers or legacy media
it was over time
you got more links and people respected you
and you would hear about this blog over here and there's this whole
distributed curation and filtering going on
so if you think like the 2004
presidential election
most of the information people are getting from the internet
was one of the first big internet news
driven elections was from
you know you had like the daily costs
and drudge but there was like
blogs that were out there and this was back
Ezra Klein was just running a blog out of his
you know dorm room at this point right
and you would in a distributed
fashion gain
credibility because okay
people have paid it it's very hard to pay attention to a blog
or pay attention I get linked to this
kid Ezra or whatever it seems to be really sharp
and now people are noticing it
and now you have a distributed curation
that solves a lot of the problems we see
when you have a completely homogenized low friction
environment like friction where
Twitter where any random conspiracy
theory or whatever that people like
can just shoot through and spread
whereas if you're starting a
blog to try to push QAnon
or something like that it's probably
going to be a really weird looking blog and you're going to have a hard time
like it's just never going to show up on people's
radar right so
everything you've said up until the very
last statement I would agree with
this is a topic I don't know a ton about
I guess QAnon
I think
QAnon
QAnon could be that
I also don't know I should know more
I apologize I don't know more
I mean that's a power and
the downside
Hitler could have
a blog today and he
would have potentially a very large following
if he's charismatic
if he's good with
words is able to express the ideas
whatever maybe is able to channel
the frustration and anger that people have about
a certain thing and so
I think that's the power of blogs but it's also
the limitation but that doesn't
we're not trying to solve that you can't solve that
the fundamental problem you're saying is not the problem
your
thesis is that there's nothing special
about large scale social
networks that guarantees
that they will keep existing and it's
important to remember for a lot of the older
generation of internet activists
so the people who are very pro internet in the early days
they were
completely flabbergasted by
the rise of these platforms
say why would you
take the internet and then build your own version of the internet
where you own all the servers
and we built this whole
distribute the whole thing we had open protocols
everyone anywhere in the world
use the same protocols your machine can talk to any other machine
it's the most democratic
communication system that's ever been built
and then these companies came along and said we're going to build our own
let's own all the servers and put them in
buildings that we own and the internet will just be
the first mile this gets you into our private
internet where we own the whole thing
completely against the entire
motivation
of the internet was like yes we it's not going to be
one person owns all the servers and you pay to access them
it's anyone server that they own
can talk to anyone else's server because we all agree on
a standard set of protocols
and so the the old guard of
pro internet people
never understood this move towards
let's build private versions of the internet
we'll build
three or four private internet and that's what we'll all use
it was the opposite basically
well it's funny enough I don't know if you follow
but Jack Dorsey is also
is a proponent
and is helping to fund
create fully distributed versions
of Twitter essentially I think
would potentially destroy Twitter
but I think there might be financial
business
cases to be made there I'm not sure
but that seems to be another alternative
as opposed to creating
a bunch of
like the long tail
creating like the ultimate long tail
of like fully distributed
which is what the internet is
I'm thinking about long tail social media
I'm thinking it's
like the text not so important
like there's groups out there
where the tech they use
to actually implement their digital only social group
whatever they might use Slack
Zoom or it doesn't matter I think in the tech world
we want to build the beautiful protocol
that okay everyone's going to use
as just a federated server
protocol in which we've worked out X Y and Z
and no one understands it because then the engineers needed all
to make I get it because I'm a nerd like this like okay
every standard has to fit with everything else
and no one understands what's going on
meanwhile you know you have this group of
bike enthusiasts that are like yeah we'll just
jump on to Zoom and have some Slack and put up a blog
and the tech doesn't really matter
like we built the world with our own curation
rules
our own sort of social ecosystem
that's generating a lot of value
I don't know if it'll happen there's a lot of money at stake
with obviously these large
but I just think they're more
I mean look how quickly Americans left
Facebook right
I mean Facebook was savvy to buy other properties
and diversify right but how quick did that take
for just standard
Facebook news feed everyone under the age
of something we're using it and no one under a certain age
is using it now it took like four years
really
I believe people can leave
Facebook overnight
I think Facebook hasn't actually
messed up
there's two things
they haven't messed up enough for people to really leave
aggressively and there's no good alternative
for them to leave
I think if good alternatives pop up
it would just immediately happen
the stuff is a lot more culturally fragile I think
I mean Twitter's having a moment because it was
feeding a certain type of
righties that was in the sort of political sphere anyways
that Twitter was
working with
but its moment could go to as well
I mean it's a really arbitrary thing
short little things and I read a wired article
about this earlier in the pandemic like this is crazy
that the way that
we're trying to communicate information about the pandemic
is in all these weird arbitrary rules
where people are screen shotting
pictures of articles that are part of a tweet
thread where you say one slash in
under it like we have the technology guys
so like really
clearly convey long form
information to people like why do we have these
and I know it's because it's the gamified dopamine hits
but what a weird medium
there's no reason for us to have to
have these threads that you have to
find and pin with your screen shot
I mean we have technology to communicate better using the internet
I mean why are epidemiologists
having to do tweet
threads because there's mechanisms
of publishing that make it easier on Twitter
I mean we're evolving as a species
and the internet is a very fresh thing
and so
it's kind of interesting to think
that as opposed to Twitter
this is what Jack also complains about
is Twitter is not innovating fast enough
and so
it's almost like the people are
innovating and thinking about
their productive life faster
than the platforms in which
they operate can catch up and so
at the point the gap grows
sufficiently they'll jump
a few people
a few innovative folks will just create an alternative
and perhaps
distributed perhaps just
many little silos
and then people will jump and then we'll just continue this kind of way
I think like Substack for example
what they're going to pull out of Twitter among other things
is the audience that was
let's say like slightly left of
center but
slightly left of center
don't like Trump uncomfortable with
like postmodern critical theories made into
political action right
and they're like yeah Twitter there was a people on there talking about this
and it made me feel
heard because I was feeling a little bit like a nerd
about it but honestly I'd probably rather subscribe
the four subs you know I'm going to have like
Barry's and Andrew Sullivan's I'll have like a
Jesse signals like I'll have a few sub stacks
I can subscribe to and honestly that's
I'm a knowledge worker who's
32 anyways probably that's an email all day
and so like there's an innovation that's going to
that group you know it's going to suck
them off which is actually a very large group
yeah that's a lot of that's a lot of energy
and then once Trump's gone I guess that's probably
going to drive that drove a lot of
more like Trump people off Twitter
like this stuff is fragile I think
so I but the fascinating
thing to me because I've hung out on parlor
for a short amount
enough to know that the interface
matters it's so fascinating like that
that it's not just about ideas
yeah it's about
creating like Substack too
creating a pleasant
experience a dicting
experience you're right you're right about that and it's hard
and it's why the end this is one of the conclusions
from that indie social media article is
it's just the ugliness matters
and I don't mean even just aesthetically but just the clunkiness
of the interfaces the
and I don't know it's
the some degree the social media companies have spent a
lot of money on this and the some degree it's
a survivorship bias yeah right I think
Twitter every time I hear Jack
talks about this it seems like
he's as surprised as anyone else
the way Twitter is being used I mean it's basically
the way you know they had
it years
ago and then you know it was great
it'll be statuses right yeah this is what I'm
doing you know and my friends can follow me
and see it and without really changing anything it just happened
to hit everything right
to support this other type of interaction well there's
also the JavaScript model which
Bernard and I talked about he just implemented
JavaScript like the crappy
version of JavaScript in 10 days throughout
there and just
changed it really quickly yeah
involved it really quickly and now it's
become according to stack exchange
the most popular programming language in the world
yeah it drives like most of the internet
and even the back end and now mobile
yeah and so that that's an argument
for the kind of
thing you're talking about where like
the bike club people yeah
could literally create the thing that would
you know run
most of the internet yeah 10 years from now
yeah so
there's something to that like as opposed
to trying to get lucky or trying to think
through stuff is just to
solve a particular problem do stuff yeah
and do stuff do something like keep tinkering
till you love it yeah yeah and
then of course the sad thing
is timing and luck matter
and that you can't really control that's the
problem yeah but you can't go
back to 2007 yeah that's
like the number one thing you could do to have a lot of
success with the new platform is go back
in time 14 years so the
thing you have to kind of think about is what is
the like what's the totally new
thing that
10 years from now would seem
obvious I mean some people saying clubhouse
is that there's been a lot of
stuff like clubhouse before yeah
but it it hit
the right kind of thing
similar to Tesla actually
what clubhouse did is it got a lot of
relatively famous people on
there quickly and
and then the the other
fact is like it's invite only
so like oh all the
famous people are on there I wonder what's
it's the FOMO like
fear that you're missing something really profound
there's exciting happening there
so those social effects
and then once you actually show up
I'm a huge fan of this
it's the javascript model is like
clubhouse is so dumb
like so simple in its interface
like you literally can't do anything except
mute on mute
as a mute button yeah and there's
a leave quietly button yeah that's it
yeah and it's it's kind of
I love single use technology
that sense yeah there's
no like there's no
it's just like
trivial and
you know Twitter kind of started like
that Facebook started like that
but they've evolved quickly to add all these features
and so on and
you know I do hope clubhouse stays that way
yeah be interesting or there's alternatives
I mean I get I mean even with clubhouse
though the so one of the issues
with a lot of these platforms I think is
bits are cheap enough
now that
we don't really need a unicorn
investor model I mean the investors need
that model there's really not
really an imperative
of we need something
that can scale to
100 million plus a year revenue
so because it was going to require this much
seed and angel investment and
you're not going to get this much seed and angel investment
unless you can have a potential exit
this this wide because you have to be part of a portfolio
that depends on one out of ten exiting
here if you don't actually need
that and you don't need
to satisfy that investor model which I
think is basically the case I mean
bits are so cheap everything is so cheap
you don't necessarily even like with clubhouse
it's investor backed right this notion of like
this needs to be a major platform
but the bike club
doesn't necessarily need a major platform
that's where I'm interested I mean I don't know
there's so much money that's the only problem that bets against
me is that you can concentrate
a lot of capital if you do these
things right I mean so Facebook was like
a fantastic capital concentration
machine it's crazy how much
where it even found that capital in the world
that it could concentrate and ossify in the stock price
that a very small number of people have
you know access to right that's
incredibly powerful so when there's
a possibility to
consolidate and gather a huge amount of capital
that's a huge imperative that's very hard
for the bike club to go up again so
but there's a lot of money in the bike club
you should see with the wall street bets
and that when a bunch of people
get together I mean it doesn't
have to be a bike it could be a bunch of different bike clubs
just kind of team up
to overtake is what we're doing now
or we're going to repurpose off the shelf
stuff that's not
we're going to repurpose whatever
it was for office productivity or something
like the clubs using Slack just to build
out these you know yeah
let's talk about email
yeah that's right I
wrote a book you're
yet another amazing
book a world without
email maybe one way to enter
this discussion is to ask what is
the hyperactive hive mind
which is the concept you open the book with yeah
and the devil
it's the scourge of hundreds
of millions so
I think so
I called this book a world without email
the real title should be a world without the hyperactive
hive mind workflow
but my publisher didn't like that
so we had to get a little bit more pithy
I was trying to answer the question after deep work
why is it so hard to do this
like if this is so valuable
if we can produce much higher if people are much
happier
why do we check email a day why are we on Slack all day
you know and so I started working on this
book immediately after deep work
and so my initial interviews were done in
2016 so it took five years
to pull the threads together I was trying to understand
why is it so hard for
most people to actually find any time
to do the stuff that actually moves the needle
and the story was and I thought this was
I hadn't heard this reported anywhere else
that's why it took me so long to pull it together
is email arrives on the scene
email spreads I trace it
it really picks up steam in the early 1990s
between like 1990
and 1995 it makes its move right
and it does so for very pragmatic reasons
it was replacing existing communication
technologies that it was better than it was mainly
the fax machine voicemail and memos right so
this was just better right so it was
a killer app because it was useful
in its wake
came a new way of collaborating
and that's the hyperactive hive mind so it's
the like the virus that follows
the the rats that
went through western Europe for the black pig as
email spread through organizations in
its wake came the hyperactive hive mind
workflow which says okay guys here's the way
we're going to collaborate we'll just work
things out on the fly with unscheduled
back and forth messages just boom boom boom
let's go back and forth hey what about this
you see this what about that client let's see
what's going on over here that followed
email it completely took over
office work
and the the need
to keep up with all these asynchronous
back and forth unscheduled messages
as those got more and more and more we had more
there's a service the need to service those
requires to check more and more and more
right and so by the time and I go through
the numbers by the time you get to today
now the average knowledge worker has to check one
of these channels once every six minutes
every single thing you do in your organization
how you talk to your colleagues how you talk
to your vendors how you talk to your clients how
you talk to the HR department it's all this
asynchronous unscheduled back and forth messaging
and you have to service the conversations
and it spiraled out of control and it has
sort of devolved a lot of work in the office
now to all I do is constantly tend
communication channels
so it's fascinating what you're describing
is
nobody ever paused in this whole
evolution
to try to create a system that actually works
that it was
kind of like a huge fan of cellular
automata so it's just kind of started
yeah very
a very simple mechanism just like cellular
automata just kind of grew to overtake
all the fundamental
communication of how we do business
and also personal life yeah that's one of
the big ideas is that
the unintentionality yeah right so this goes
back to technological determinism and this
is a weird business book because I go deep
on philosophy I go deep
on for some reason we get in the paleoanthropology
for a while we do a lot of neuroscience
it's kind of a weird book
but I got real into this technological determinism
right this notion that just the presence
of a technology can change how people act
that's my big argument about what happened
with the hive mind and I can document
specific examples
right so I document this example in IBM
maybe 85
but isn't like the mid to late 80s IBM
our monk headquarters we're going to put
an internal email right because
it's convenient and so
they ran a whole study and so I talked to
the engineer who ran this study Adrian
Stuntley we're going to run this study to figure out how much
do we communicate because it was still an era where
it's expensive right so you
have to provision a mainframe so you can't
over provision like we want to know how much communication
actually happened so they went and figured it out
how many memos how many calls how many notes
great we'll provision a mainframe
to handle email that can handle all of that
so if all of our communication moves to email
the mainframe will still be fine
in three days they had melted it down
people were communicating six times more
than that estimate so just in
three days the presence
of a low friction digital communication tool
drastically changed how everyone collaborated
so that's not enough time for
you know in all hands meeting guys we figured
it out you know this is what we need to communicate
a lot more is what's going to make us
more productive we need more emails it's emergent
isn't that
just on a positive end amazing to you
like isn't
email amazing like in those early days
like just a frictionless communication
I mean
email is awesome like
people say that there's a lot of
problems with emails just like people say a
lot of problems with Twitter and so on it's kind
of cool that you can just send a little note
it was a miracle right so
I wrote a
there's originally was a New Yorker piece from
a year or two ago called was email a mistake
and then it's in the book too
but I go into the history
of email like why did it come along
and it solved a huge
problem so it was the problem of fast
asynchronous communication and
it was a problem that did not exist until we got large offices
we got large offices
synchronous communication like let's get on the phone
at the same time there's too much overhead to it
too many people you might have to talk to
asynchronous communication like let me send you a memo
when I'm ready and you can read it when you're ready
took too long and so it was like
a huge problem so one of the things I talked about
is the way that when they built the CIA
headquarters there's such a need for
fast asynchronous communication
that they built a pneumatic powered
email system they had these pneumatic tubes
all throughout the headquarters with
electromagnetic routers so you would put
your message in a plexiglass
tube and you would turn these brass dials
about the location you would stick it in these
things and pneumatic tubes and it would shoot
and sort and work its way through these tubes
to show up in just a minute
or something at the floor and at the general
office suite where you wanted to go
and my point is the fact that they spent so much
money to make that work show how important
fast asynchronous communication
was to large offices so when email came along
it was a
productivity silver bullet it was a miracle
I talked to the researchers who were working on
computer supported collaboration in the late 80s
to figure out how are we going to use computer
networks to be more productive and they were
building all these systems and tools email
showed up it just wiped all that research off
the map there's no need to build these
custom intranet applications there's no need
to build these these communication platforms
email could just do everything
right so it was a
miracle application which is why it spread
everywhere that's one of these things where
okay unintended consequences right you had
this miracle productivity silver bullet it
spread everywhere but it was so
effective it just you know I don't know like
a drug I'm sure there's some pandemic
metaphor here analogy here
of a drug that like it's so effective at treating
this that it also blows up your whole immune system
and then everyone gets sick but well ultimately
it probably significantly increased the productivity
of the world but there's a kind of hump
that it now is plateaued
and then forward the
fundamental question you're asking is like
okay how do we take the next how do we
keep increasing the productivity
I think it brought it down so my
contention and
so again there's a little bit in the book
I have a more recent wired article
that put some newer numbers to this
I subscribe to the hypothesis that
the hyperactive hive mind was so detrimental
so yeah it helped
productivity at first right when you could
do fascinicos communication but very
quickly there was a sort of exponential
rise in communication amounts
once we got to the point where the hive mind
meant you had to constantly check your email
I think that made us so unproductive
that it actually was pulling down
non industrial productivity and I think the only
reason why so it certainly has not been
going up that metrics been stagnating
for a long time now while all this was going
on I think the only reason why it hasn't
fallen is that we added these
extra shifts off the books
I'm gonna work for three hours in the morning
I'm gonna work for three hours at night and only
that I think has allowed us to basically
maintain a stagnated
non industrial growth it we should have been
shooting up the charts I mean this is
miraculous innovations the computer
networks and then we built out these hundred billion
dollar ubiquitous worldwide high
speed wireless internet infrastructure
with supercomputers in our pockets where we could talk to
anyone at any time like why did our
productivity not shoot off the charts because our brain
can't context which once every six minutes so it's
fundamentally back to the context switching
in context switching
is poison it's the what
is it about email that forces context
switching is it both our psychology that
drags us in yeah no expectation
yeah right right because it's not
I think we've seen this through a personal
a personal will or failure
lens recently like oh my addicted
to email yes I have
bad etiquette about my email
no it's the underlying workflow
so the tool itself I will
exonerate right I think
I would rather use pop three than
a fax protocol right I think it's easier
the issue is the hyperactive
hive mind workflow so if I am now collaborating
with 20 or 30 different people
with back and forth unscheduled
messaging I have to tend those conversations
right it's like you have 30
metaphorical ping pong tables and when the
balls come back across you have to pretty soon
hit it back or stuff actually
grinds to a halt so it's the
workflow that's the problem it's not the tool
it's the fact that we use it to do all of our
collaboration let's just send messages back and forth
which means you can't be far from checking
that because if you take a break
if you batch if you try to have better habits
it's going to slow things down so
my whole villain is this
hyperactive hive mind workflow
the tool is fine I don't want the tool
to go away but I want to replace
the hyperactive hive mind workflow I think this is going to be
one of the biggest
value generating productivity
revolutions of the 21st century
I quote an anonymous CEO
is pretty well known who says this is going to be the
moonshop of the 21st century is going to be
of that importance there's so much latent
productivity that's being suppressed
because we just figure things out on the fly
and email that as we figure that out I think
it's going to be
hundreds of billions of dollars
you're so
absolutely right the
question is what is the world
without email look like how do we fix email
so what happens is
at least in my vision
you identify well
actually there's these different processes
that make up my work day like these are things
that I do repeatedly
often in collaboration with other people that do
useful things for my company or whatever
right now most of these processes
are implicitly implemented with the hyperactive hive mind
how do we do this thing like answering
client questions to shoot messages back and forth
how do we do this thing posting podcast
episodes we'll just figure it out on the fly
my main argument is we actually have to do like they do
in the industrial sector take each of these
processes and say is there a better way to do
this and by better I mean
a way that's going to minimize the need to have unscheduled
back and forth messaging so we actually
have to do process engineering
this created a massive growth and productivity
in the industrial sector during the 20th century
we have to do it in knowledge work we can't just rock and roll
an inbox as we actually have to say
how do we deal with client questions well let's put in place
a process that doesn't require us to
send messages back and forth how do we post podcast
episodes let's automate this to a degree where
I don't have to just send you a message on the fly
and you do this
process by process and the pressure on that
inbox is released and now you don't have to check it
every six minutes you still have email I mean
like I need to send you a file sure I'll use email
but we're not coordinating or collaborating over
email or Slack which is just a faster
way of doing the hive mind I mean Slack doesn't
solve anything there you
have better structured bespoke processes
I think that's what's going to unleash this
massive productivity the spoke so
the interesting thing is like for example
you and I exchanged some emails so obviously
I for let's just say
my particular case I schedule podcasts there's
a bunch of different tasks fascinating
enough that I
do that could be converted into processes
yeah is it up to me
to create that process or do you
think we also need to build tools just like
email was a protocol
for helping us
create process for the different
tasks I mean I think ultimately
the whole organization
whole team has to be involved I think ultimately
there's certainly a lot of investor money being
spent right now to try to figure out those tools
right so I think Silicon Valley has figured this out
in the past couple of years this is the difference between
when I was talking to people after
deep work and now five years later
is this
scent is in the air right because there's so much
latent productivity so yes there are going to be
new tools which I think could help there are already
tools that exist I mean in
the different groups I profile use things like
Trello or Basecamp or Asana
or Flow and you know
our schedule wants and acuity like there's
there's a lot of tools out there
the key is not to think about it in terms
of what tool do I replace email with instead
you think about it with
I have a pro we're trying to come with a process
that reduces back and forth messages oh what
tool might help us
might help us do that yeah and I would
push it's not about necessarily efficiency in
fact some of these things are going to take more time
so writing a letter to someone
is like a high value activity it's probably
worth doing the thing that's killer is
the back and forth because now I have
the key to checking right so we scheduled
this together because I knew you from
before but like most of the interviews
I was scheduling for this actually
I have a process with my publicist where we
use a shared document and she put stuff
in there and then I check it twice a week
and there's scheduling options
I say here's what I want to do this one or this will work for this one
or whatever and it takes more time in the moment
than just but it means that we
have almost no back and forth messaging
for podcast scheduling which without
this so like with my UK publisher
I didn't put this process in the place because
we're not doing as many interviews
but it's all the time and I'm like oh
I could really feel the difference right
it's the back and forth that's killer
I suppose it is up to the individual
people involved like you said
knowledge workers
like they have to carry the responsibility
of
creating processes like how
always asking the first principles question
how couldn't this be converted into a process
yeah so you can start by doing this yourself
like just with what you can control
I think ultimately once the teams
are doing that I think that's probably the right scale
if you try to do this at the organizational scale
you're going to get bureaucracy right
so if it's you know right if
Elon Musk is going to dictate
down to everyone at Tesla
or something like this that's too much remove
you get bureaucracy but if it's we're a team of six
that's working together
on you know whatever power
train software then we can figure out on our own
what are our processes how do we want to do this
so it's ultimately also creating a culture
where saying like an email
sending an email just for the hell of it it should
be taboo like yeah so like
you are being
you're being destructive
to the productivity of the team by sending the email
as opposed to
helping develop a
process and so on that
that will ultimately
automate this that's why I'm trying to spread
this message of the context which is as poison
I get so much into the science of it I think we underestimate
how much it kills us
to have to wrench away our context look at a message
and come back and so once you have the mindset
of it's a huge thing to ask
of someone to have to
take their attention off something and look back at this
and if they have to do that for three or four
times like we're just going to figure this out on the fly
and every message is going to require five checks
of the inbox while you wait for it well you've now you've created
whatever it is at this point 25
or 30 context shifts
like you've just done a huge
disservice to someone say this would be like if I had a professional
athlete like hey do me a favor
I need you to go do this press interview but to get there you're going to have to
carry this sandbag and sprint
up this hill like completely exhaust your muscles
and then you have to go play a game like of course I'm not going to
ask an athlete to do like an incredibly
physically demanding thing right before a game
but something as easy as
thoughts question mark or like hey
do you want to jump on a call and it's going to be six
back and forth messages to figure it out it's
kind of the cognitive equivalent right you're taking
the wind out of someone yeah and by the way
for people who are listening
because I recently posted a few job openings
for us so I had to help with this thing
and one of the things that
people are surprised when they work with me is how many
spreadsheets and processes are involved
and it's like Claude Shannon right I talked about
communication theory information theory
it takes time to come up with a clever code
up front so you spend more time up front figuring out
those spreadsheets and trying to get people on board
with it but then
your communication going forward is all much more efficient
so over time you're using
much less bandwidth right so
you do pain up front
it's quicker just right now to send an email
but if I spend a half day to do this
over the next six months I've saved
myself 600 emails
now here's a tough question
for you know from the computer science perspective
we often over optimize
so you create processes
and you
okay just like you're saying
it's so pleasurable
to increase
in the long
term productivity that sometimes
you just enjoy that process in itself
by just creating processes
and you actually
never
like it has a negative effect
on productivity long term because you're too obsessed
with the processes
is that
a nice problem to have essentially
I mean it's a problem
let's look at the one sector that does do this
which is developers
right so agile methodologies
like Scrum or Kanban are
basically workflow methodologies that are
much better than the hyperactive hive mind
but man
some of those programmers get pretty obsessive
I don't know if you've ever talked to a whatever level 3
Scrum master
they get really obsessive about
like it has to happen exactly this way
and it's probably seven times more complex
than it needs to be
I'm hoping that's just because nerds like me
like to do that but it's
a broadly probably an issue
right we have to be careful because you can just go down
that fiddling path
like so it needs to be here's how we do it
let's reduce the messages and let's roll
you can't save yourself
through
if you can get the process just right
so I wrote this article
kind of recently called the rise and fall and getting things done
and I profiled
this productivity guru
named Merlin Mann and I talked about this movement
called productivity prawn
as like elite speak term
in the early 2000s where people just became convinced
that if they could combine
their productivity systems with software
and they could find just the right software
just the right configuration where they could offload
most of the difficulty of work what happened
with the machine so we kind of figured out
and then they could just sort of crank widgets
and the whole thing fell apart because
it's work is hard and it's hard to do
and making decisions about what to work on is hard
and no system can really do that for you
so you have to have this
this sort of balance between
context switches are poison
so we got to get rid of the context switches
once like something's working good enough to get rid of the context switches
then get after it
there's a logical process there for me
the OCD nature
I've literally embarrassing enough
have lost my shit before
when
in many of the processes that involve python scripts
the rule is
to not use
spaces
there's like rules for how you format stuff
okay
and I should not lose my shit
when somebody had a space
and maybe capital letters
it's okay to have a space
because there's this feeling like
something's not perfect
and as opposed to in the python script
allowing some flexibility around that
you create this programmatic way
that's flawless and when everything's working
perfectly it's perfect
but actually
if you strive for perfection
it has the same
like it has a lot of the stress
that you were seeking to escape with the context switching
because
you're almost
stressing about errors
like when the process is functioning
there's always this anxiety of
like I wonder if it's gonna
succeed
I wonder if it's gonna succeed
I think some of that's just you and I probably
it's just our mindset
we do computer science
so chicken and egg
and a lot of the processes
of working here are much rougher
instead of letting clients just
we have a weekly call
and then we send them a breakdown of everything we
committed to right
that's a process that works okay I get asked a lot of questions
because I'm the javascript guy in the company
instead of doing that by email I have office hours
this is what base camp does
you come to my office hours that cuts down a lot of back and forth
instead of emailing about this project we'll have
a trello board
and we'll do a weekly really structure
status meeting real quick what's going on
who needs what let's go
and now everything's on there and on our inboxes
so like that rough level of granularity
that gets you most of the way there
so the parts that you
can't automate and turn into a process
so
how many parts like that do you think should
remain in a perfect world
and
for those parts where email is
still useful
what do you recommend those emails
look like how should you write
emails when should you send them
yeah I think email is good
for delivering information
right so I think of it like a fax machine
or something you know it's a really good fax machine
so if I need to send you something
and you just send you a file I need to broadcast a new
policy or something like email is a great
way to do it it's bad for
collaboration so you're having
a conversation like we're trying to
reach a decision on something I'm trying to learn
about something I'm trying to clarify what something
what what this is that it's more than
just like a one answer type question
then I think that you shouldn't be doing an email
but see here's the thing
like you and I
don't talk often and so we have a kind
of new interaction it's not
so sure
yeah you have a book coming out so there's a process
and so on but
say there don't you think there's a lot of
novel interactive experiences
yeah it's fine so you could just
for every novel experience it's okay to
have a little bit of exchange it's fine
like I think it's fine if stuff comes
in over the transom or it's you hear from
someone you haven't heard from in a while
I think all that's fine I mean
that's that's email at its best where it
starts to kill us is where all of our
collaboration is happening with the back and forth so when you've
moved the bulk of that out of your inbox
now you're back in that Meg Ryan movie
like you got mail where it's like all right
load this up and you wait for the vote I'm like oh
we got a message yeah
Lex sent me a message this is interesting right back to
the AOL days so you're talking about the bulk
of the the business world
where like email has replaced the actual
communication
all the communication protocols required to
accomplish anything everything is just happening with messages
so if you now get most stuff
done repeatable collaborations
with with other processes
that don't require you to check these inboxes then the inbox
can serve like an inbox which
includes hearing from interesting people
right or sending something hey I don't
know if you saw this I thought you might like it like it's great for that
so there's there's probably
a bunch of people listening to this they're like
yeah but
I work on a team and they're all they use
is email how do you start the revolution
from like the ground up yeah
well do it a do asymmetric optimization
first so identify all your
processes and then change what you can change
and be socially very careful about it
so don't necessarily say like okay
this is a new process we all have to do
you're just you know hey we
gotta get this report ready here's
what I think we should do like I'll get a draft into our Dropbox
folder by like noon on Monday
grab it I won't
touch it again until Tuesday morning
and then I'll look at your changes I have this office
hours always scheduled Tuesday afternoon so
if there's anything that catches your attention grab me
then but I've told the designer
who cc'd on this that
by C.O.B. Tuesday the
final version will be ready for them to take and
polish or whatever like the person the other is like great
I'm glad you know Cal has a plan
so I just what I need to do I need to edit this
tomorrow whatever right but you've actually pulled them into
a process that means we're going to get this report together
without having to just go back and forth you just
asymmetrically optimize these
things and then you can
begin the conversation and maybe that's where my
book comes in place you just sort of
yeah slide it slide it across
to buy the book just leave it
leave it to everybody on your team
okay so we solved the bulk of the email problem
of this is there a case to be made that
even for like communication between you and
I we should move away
from from
email and for example there's a guy
recently I don't know if you know comedians but there's
a guy named Joey Diaz yeah that
I've had an interaction with recently
and that guy first of all the sweetest
human despite what his comedy
sounds like is the sweetest human being
and he's a big proponent of just pick up
the phone yeah and call
yeah and it makes me so uncomfortable
people call me yeah it's like I don't know what to
do with this thing
but it kind of gets everything done
quicker I think
if I don't move the anxiety from that is
there a case to be made for that or his email
could still be the most efficient way
to do this no I mean look if you have
to interact with someone
there's a lot of efficiency and synchrony
right and this something from the distributed system theory
where you know if you go from synchronous to asynchronous
networks there's a huge amount of overhead
to the asynchronous so actually the protocols required
to solve things in asynchronous networks
are significantly more complicated
and fragile than synchronous protocols
so if we can just do real time
it's usually better than also from
interaction like social connection standpoint
there's a lot more information in the human voice
in the back and forth
yeah if you just call so very generational
right like our generation will be comfortable
talking on the phone in a way
that like a younger generation isn't but an older
generation is more comfortable with well
you just call people whereas we
so there's a happy medium but most of my good friends
we just talk we have regular
phone calls okay yeah it's not
I don't just call them we schedule it we schedule
it yeah just on text like yeah you want to talk
sometimes soon
do you ever have a process around friends
not really
I feel like I should I feel like
when you have like a lot of interesting
friend possibilities is you have like
an interesting problem right like really interesting
people you can talk to
well that's that's one problem the other one is the
introversion where I'm just afraid
of people and get really stressed like
I freak out and so you picked a good
line of work yeah
now perhaps it's the Goggins thing it's
like facing your fears whatever
but it's almost like
there's a
it has to do with the timetables thing and the
deep work that
the nice thing about the processes is
it not only
automates
sort of automates
a way the context switching it ensures
you do the important things too yeah
it's like prioritized so
the thing is with email
because everything is done over email
you can
be lazy in the same way with like social
networks and and do the
easy things first yeah they're not that
important so the process
also enforces that you do the important
things and for me the important
things is like
it sounds weird but like social connection
no that's one of the most important
things in all of human existence
yeah and doing it
the paradoxical thing I got into this
for digital minimalism
the more you sacrifice on behalf of the
connection the stronger the connection feels
right so sacrificing non trivial time
and attention on behalf of someone
is what tells your brain that this is a
serious relationship
which is why social media had this
paradoxical effect of making people feel less
social because it took the friction out of
it and so the brain just doesn't like yeah
you've been commenting on this person's
whatever you've been retweeting them or
sending them some text you haven't
it's not hard enough and then
the perceived strength of that social
connection diminishes where if you talk to
them or go spend time with them or whatever
you're going to feel better about it
so the friction is good I have
a thing with some of my friends where at the end of
each call we take a couple minutes to schedule the next
then you never it's like I do with
haircuts or something right like if I don't
schedule it then yeah I'm never going to get
my haircut right and so we it's like okay
when you want to talk next you know
yeah that's really that's a really good idea
I just don't call friends
and like every 10 years
I do something dramatic for them so then
we maintain the friendship like I'd murder
somebody that they really don't like
careful man Joey might ask
you to do that
oh this is one of my favorite things
Lex I need to come down to New Jersey
that's exactly what we're going to do
with that robot dog of yours
we're going to go down to Jersey there's a special
human I love the comedian world
they've been shaking up I don't know if you
listen to Joe Rogan all those folks
they kind of
are doing something interesting for
MIT and academia
they're shaking up this world
a little bit like podcasting
because comedians are paving the way for podcasting
yeah and so you have like
Andrew Huberman who's a neuroscientist
in front of my now
he's like
into podcasting now and
you're into podcasting of course you're not
necessarily podcasting on computer science
currently right yeah but
that
it feels like you could have a lot of
the free spirit
of the comedians
implemented by the people
who are academically trained
who actually have a niche
specialty yeah and then
that results I mean who knows what the
experiment looks like but that results
me being able to talk about robotics with
your ideas when
he says you know drops F bombs
every other sentence and
the world is like
I've seen actually a shift within
colleagues and friends within MIT
where they're becoming much more
accepting of that kind of thing it's very
interesting that's interesting so you're seeing
okay because they're seeing how popular
it is they're like well you're really popular
I don't know how they think about it at
Georgetown for example I don't know it's
interesting but I think what what happens
is the popularity
of it combined with
just good conversations with
people they respect
yeah okay wait this is the
thing yeah and this is more fun
to listen to than a shitty zoom
lecture yeah
about their work yeah it's like there's
something here there's something interesting and we don't
nobody actually knows what that is
just like with like clubhouse or something
nobody's figured out like
where is this medium take is this a legitimate medium
of education yeah or
is this just like a fun
well that's your innovation I think was
we can bring on professors
yeah and I know Joe Rogan to some of
that too but but you know
but your professors
in your field yeah bring on all these
MIT guys who I remember you know
well that's been the big challenge for me is
I don't is
I feel
I would I would ask big
like philosophical questions of
maybe people like yourself
they're like really
well public like
so for example you have a lot of excellent papers
on
you know that a lot has a lot of
theory in it right
and there is some temptation to just
go through papers and I think
it's possible to actually do that I haven't done that much
but I think it's possible it just requires
a lot of preparation
and I can probably only do that with things
that I'm actually
like in the field I'm aware of
but there's a dance
that I would love to be able to try to hit
right where it's actually getting to the core
interesting ideas as opposed to just talking
about philosophy at the same time
there's a large audience of people that
just want to be inspired by
like by disciplines
where they don't necessarily know
the details but there's a lot of people
that are like hmm I'm really curious
I've been thinking about pivoting
careers into software engineering
they would love to hear from
people like you about computer science
even if it's like theory yeah but just
like the idea that you can have big ideas
you push them through and it's interesting
you fight for it yeah well there's some
there's what is it computer
file and
number file these YouTube channels
there's channels
I watch I'm like chess exceptionally popular
where I don't
I don't understand
maybe 80% of the time what the hell they're talking about
because they're talking about like
why this move is better than this move but I love
the passion and the genius
of those people just overhearing it
I don't know why it's so exciting
do you look at like Scott Aronson's blog at all
the settled optimized yeah it's like
hardcore complexity theory
but it's just an enthusiasm
or like Terry Tao's blog a little bit of humor
Terry Tao is a blog
he used to yeah he would
and it would just be I'm going all in
on you know here's the new affine
group with which you can do whatever
I mean it was just equations well in the case of Scott
Aronson he's good he's able
to turn on like the
inner troll and comedian
and so on yeah he's he keeps the fun
which is the best and he's a philosophical guy
he wrote that he turns off philosophy
yeah yeah so
you know we're exploring these different
ways of communicating in science and
in exciting the world speaking of which
I gotta ask you about computer science
yeah that's right I do some of that
so I mean
a lot of it a lot
of your work is what inspired this
deep thinking about
that activity from all the different
angles because some of the most
rigorous work is mathematical work
and in computer science that theoretical computer
science let me ask the Scott
Aronson question of like is there
something to you that stands out in particular
that's beautiful or inspiring
or just really
insightful about computer science
or the or maybe mathematics
I mean I like
theory and in particular
what I've always liked in theory is the notion of
possibilities that's kind of my specialty
so within the
within the context of distributed algorithms
my specialty is impossibility results the idea
that you can argue
nothing exists that solves this
or nothing exists that can solve this
faster than this
and that's I think that's really interesting
and that goes all the way back to Turing
there's his original paper
on computable numbers
with their connection to the German
problem but basically the German name
that Hilbert called the decision problem
this was precomputers but he was
you know he's English so it's written in English so it's very accessible paper
and it's
it lays the foundation for all of theoretical computer science
he just has this insight he's like well if we think
about like an algorithm he figures out like
all effective procedures or Turing
machines are basically algorithms we could
really describe a Turing machine with a number
which we can now imagine with like computer
code you could just take a source file and
just treat the binary version of the file as like
a really long number right but it's like
every program is just a finite
number it's a natural number
and then he realized like one way to think about
a problem is you have
this is like kind of the Mike Sipser approach
but you have a sort of it's a language
so of an infinite number of strings some of them
are in the language and some of them aren't but basically
you can imagine a problem is represented as an
infinite binary string where in every
position like a one means that string is in the
language and a zero means it isn't
and then he applied Cantor
from the 19th century and said okay
natural numbers are countable
so it's countably infinite
and infinite binary strings
you can use a diagonalization argument and show
they're uncountable
so there's just vastly more
problems than there are algorithms
so basically anything you can come up with for the
most part almost certainly is not solvable by a computer
you know and then and then he was like let me
give a particular example and he figured out the
very first computability proof and let's just
walk through with a little bit of simple logic
the halting problem can't be solved by an algorithm
and that kicked off the whole
enterprise of
some things can't be solved by
algorithm some things can't be solved by computers
and we've just been doing theory on that
since the, that was the 30s
he wrote that. So proving that something is impossible
is
sort of a more stricter version of that is it like
proving bounds on the performance
of different algorithms? Yeah so bounds are
upper bounds right so you say
this algorithm does
at least as well and no worse than this but you're looking
at a particular algorithm and possibility proof
say no algorithm
ever could ever solve this problem
so no algorithm could ever solve the halting problem
So it's problem centric
it's making something
making a conclusive statement about the
problem and that's somehow
satisfying because it's
philosophically interesting. Yeah I mean it all goes
back to you get back to Plato it's
all reducto ad absurdum
so all these arguments have to start the only way to
do it is there's an infinite number of solutions
that you can't go through them as you say let's assume
for the sake of contradiction
that there existed something that solves this problem
and then you turn to crank logic
until you blow up the universe and then you go
back and say okay our original assumption
that this solution exists can't be true
I just think philosophically it's like a
really exciting kind of beautiful thing it's what
I specialize in within distributed algorithms
is more like time bound
and possibility results like no
no algorithm can solve this problem faster than this
in this setting of all
the infinite number of ways you might ever do it.
So you have of many papers
but the one that caught my eye smooth analysis
of dynamic networks
in which you write
a problem with the worst
case perspective is that it often leads to extremely
strong lower bounds these strong
results motivate a key question
is this bound robust in the sense that it
captures the fundamental difficulty
introduced by dynamism
or is the bound fragile
in the sense that the poor performance it describes
depends on an exact sequence
of adversarial changes
fragile lower bounds
leave open the possibility of algorithms that
might still perform well in practice
that's a
in the sense of the impossible and the bounds
discussion presents the
interesting question I just like the
idea of robust and fragile bounds
but
what do you make about this kind
of tension between
what's provably like
what bounds you can prove
that are like robust
and something that's a bit more fragile
and also
by way of answering that
for this particular paper
can you say what the hell are dynamic networks
what are distributed outcomes
you don't know this come on now
and I have no idea and what is smooth analysis
yeah well okay so
smooth analysis it's so wasn't my idea
so Spielman and Tang came up
with this in the context of sequential
algorithms just like
the normal world of an algorithm that runs on a computer
and they were looking at
there's a well known algorithm called the simplex
algorithm but basically you're trying to
whatever find a
whole around a group of points and there's an algorithm
that worked really well in practice
but when you analyze it you would say
you know I can't guarantee it's going to work well in practice
because you have just the right
inputs this thing could run really long
right but in practice it seemed to be really fast
so smooth analysis as they came
in and they said let's assume that
a bad guy chooses the inputs
it could be anything like really bad ones
and all we're going to do because in simplex
their numbers we're going to just randomly
put a little bit of noise on each of the
numbers and they said if you put a little bit of noise
on the numbers suddenly simplex algorithm
goes really fast
like oh that explains this lower bound
this idea that it could sometimes run really long
was a fragile bound because it could only
run a really long time if you had exactly
the worst pathological input
and then my collaborators and I brought this over to the world
the distributed algorithms
we brought them over the general lower bounds
so in the world of dynamic networks
so distributed algorithm is a bunch of algorithms
on different machines talking to each other
trying to solve a problem and sometimes they're in a network
so you imagine them connected with
network links and a dynamic
network those can change
so I was talking to you but now I can't talk to you
anymore now I'm connected to a person over here
it's a really hard environment mathematically
speaking and there's a lot of really
strong lower bounds which you could imagine
if the network can change all the time
and a bad guy is doing it it's like hard
to do things well so there's an algorithm
running on every single node in the network
and then you're trying to say something
of any kind that makes any kind of definitive
sense about the performance of that algorithm
yeah so like we're
I just submitted a new paper on this a couple weeks ago
and we were looking at a very simple problem
there's some messages in the network
we want everyone to get them
if the network doesn't change
you can do this pretty well
you can pipeline them there's some algorithms that work
basic algorithms that work really well
network can change every round
there's these lower bounds that says
it takes a really long time
there's a way that like no matter what algorithm you come up with
there's a way that network can change in such a way
that just really slows down your progress
basically right so smooth analysis
there says yeah but that seems like a
really you know really bad luck
if your network was changing like
exactly in the right
way that you needed to screw your algorithm
so we said what if we
randomly just add or remove a couple edges
in every round so the adversaries trying to choose the worst
possible network we're just tweaking it a little bit
and in that case this is a new paper
I mean it's a blinded submission so maybe I shouldn't
it's not whatever
we basically showed
an anonymous friend of yours submitted a paper
anonymous friend of mine yeah
whose paper should be accepted
so that even just adding like one random edge
per round
and here's a cool thing about the simplest
possible solution to this problem
blows away that lower bound it does really well
so that's like a very fragile lower bound
because we're like it's almost impossible
to actually
keep things slow
I wonder how many lower bounds you can
smash open
with this kind of analysis and show that they're fragile
this is my interest yeah
because in distributed algorithms
there's a ton of really famous strong lower bounds
but things have to go wrong
really really wrong
for these lower bound arguments to work
and so I like this approach so this
whole notion of fragile versus robust
I was like well let's go in and just
throw a little noise in there and if it becomes solvable
then maybe that lower bound wasn't
really something we should worry about
that's kind of embarrassed that's really uncomfortable
that's really embarrassing
to a lot of people
okay this is the OCD thing with the
spaces
it feels really good when you can provenize bound
and
if you say that that bound is fragile
that's
that's like there's going to be a sad kid
that walks
like with their lunchbox back home
my lower bound doesn't matter
I don't think they care it's all
I don't know it feels like to me a lot of this
theory is just math machismo
whatever this was a hard bound to prove
what do you think about that
so if you show that something is fragile
that's more important that's really important
in practice
so do you think kind of theoretical
computer science is living its own world
just like mathematics and their main
effort which I think is very valuable
is to develop ideas it's not necessarily
interesting whether it's applicable
in the real world we don't care about the applicability
we kind of do but not really
we're terrible with computers
we can't do anything useful with computers
we don't know how to code and
we're not productive members
of technological society but
I do think things percolate
you percolate from the
world of theory into the world of algorithm design
which we'll pull on the theory and now suddenly
it's useful and then the algorithm design
gets pulled into the world of practice where they say
well actually we can make this algorithm a lot better
because in practice really these servers do XYZ
and now we can make this super efficient
and so I do think, I mean I teach
theory to the PhD students at Georgetown
I show them the sort of funnel
of like okay we're over here doing theory
but eventually some of this stuff will percolate
down in effect at the very end
you know a phone but it's a long
it's a long tunnel
but the very question you're asking
at the highest philosophical level is fascinating
like if you take a system
a distributed system or a network
and introduce a little bit of noise
into it like how many
problems of that nature
are fundamentally
changed by that little introduction
of noise? Yeah
because it's all especially distributed algorithms
the model is everything
the way we work is we're incredibly precise
about here's exactly, it's mathematical
here's exactly how the network works
and it's a state machine, algorithms are state
machines, there's rounds and schedulers
we're super precise so we can prove lower bounds
but yeah often there's lower, those impossibility results
really get at the hard
edges of exactly how that model
works so we'll see if this
we publish the paper on this, that paper you
mentioned
they kind of introduced the idea to the distributed algorithms
and I think that's got
some traction and there's been some follow up
so we've just submitted our
our next, honestly
the issue with the next is that like the result fell out
so easily and this shows the mathematical
machismo problem in these fields
is there's a good chance
the paper won't be accepted because there wasn't
enough mathematical self
modulation. That's such a nice finding
so even just showing that very
few, just very little bit of noise
can have a dramatic
make a dramatic statement about
it was a big surprise to us but
once we figured out how to show it
it's not too hard
and these are venues
for theoretical
okay so
the fascinating tension there exists in other disciplines
like one of them is machine learning
which
despite the power
of machine learning and deep learning and all
like the impact of it
in the real world
the main conferences on machine learning
are still resistant to application papers
I'm not
sort of
and application papers broadly defined
meaning like
finding almost like you would
like Darwin did by like
going around
collecting some information
saying huh isn't this interesting
like those are some of the most popular blogs
and yet as a paper
it's not really accepted. I wonder
what you think about this whole world of deep
learning
from a perspective of theory
what do you
make of this whole discipline
of the success of neural networks of how to do
science on them. Are you excited
by the possibilities
of what we might discover about neural networks
do you think is fundamental in engineering discipline
or is there something
theoretical that we might crack open
one of these days and understanding
something deep about how system optimization
when how systems learn
I am convinced by
is it Tegemark and MIT who's
Tegmark? Yeah, Tegmark, right
so his notion has always been convincing to me
that the fact that some of these models are inscrutable
is not fundamental to them
and that we can we're going to get better
and better because in the end you know
the reason why practicing computer scientists
often who are doing AI
or working at AI on industry aren't like
worried about so much existential
threats is because they see the reality is
they're multiplying matrices
with NumPy or something like this, right?
And tweaking constants and hoping that the
classifier fitness for
God's sakes before the submission
deadline actually gets above some like it feels
like it's linear algebra
and TDM, right?
But anyways
I'm really convinced with his idea that once we understand
better and better what's going on from a theory perspective
it's going to make it into an engineering discipline
so in my mind where we're going to end up
is okay you forget
these metaphors of neurons
and these things are going to be put down
into these mathematical kind of elegant equations
differentiable equations that just
kind of work well and then it's going to be
when I need a little bit of AI in this thing
plumbing
like let's get a little bit of a
pattern recognizer with a noise module
and let's connect I mean you know this feel better than me
so I don't know if this is like a reasonable
a reasonable prediction but that we're going to
it's going to become less inscrutable
and then it's going to become more engineerable
and then we're going to have AI and more
things because we're going to have a little bit more
control over how we
piece together these different classification
black boxes.
So one of the problems and there might be
some interesting parallels that you might provide
intuition on is you know neural networks are very
large and they have a lot of
it you know we were talking about
you know
dynamic networks and distributed
algorithms
and one of the problems with the analysis of
neural networks
is you know you have a lot of nodes
and you have a lot of edges
to be able to interpret
and to control different things is very difficult
there's
fields and trying to figure out
like mathematically how you form
clean
representations that are like
like one node contains
all the information about
a particular thing and no other nodes
are correlated to it so like
it has unique knowledge
but that ultimately boils down to trying
to simplify this thing
into that goes against this very
nature which is like
deeply connected
and like dynamic
and just you know
hundreds of millions billions of nodes
and in a distributed sense
like when you zoom out
the thing has a representation
of understanding of something but the individual
is just doing that little exchange
thing and it's the same thing
with Stephen Wolfram when you talk about
cellular automata it's very difficult to do math
when you have a huge collection
of distributed things each acting on their own
and it's almost like
it feels like it's
almost impossible to do any kind of
theoretical work in the traditional sense
it almost becomes completely
like
you become a biologist as
opposed to a theoretician
you just study it experimentally
I think that's the big question I guess
right?
Is the large size
and interconnectedness of the
deep learning network
fundamental to that task or we just not very good
at it yet because we're using the wrong
metaphor
I mean the human brain learns with much
fewer examples and
with much less tuning of the
whatever whatever whatever probably that requires
to get those deep mind networks up and running
but yeah so I don't really know
but the one thing I have observed is that
there's a
the mundane nature of some of the working with
these models
tends to lead people to think that
to do it like
it could be Skynet or it could be
like a lot of pain to get
the thermostat to do what we wanted to do
and there's a lot of open questions in between there
and then of course
the
distributed network
of humans
that use these systems so like you can have
the system itself
the neural network but you can also have
little algorithms controlling the behavior of humans
which is what you have with social networks
it's possible that a very
what is it a toaster or whatever
the opposite of Skynet
when taking a scale well used by individual humans
and controlling their behavior can actually have
the Skynet effect
so the scale there
we might have that now
but we just don't know
is Twitter creating a little mini Skynet
because what happens it twirls out
ramifications in the world
and is it really that much different
if it's a robot with tentacles
or a bunch of servers
and the destructive effects
could be
it could be political but
it could also be like
you could probably make an interesting case that
the coronavirus
spread on Twitter too
in the minds of people
like the fear
and the misinformation in some very interesting ways
mixed up
and maybe this pandemic wasn't sufficiently
dangerous to where that could have created a weird
like
instability but maybe other things might
create instability like somebody
God forbid detonates nuclear weapons
so where and then maybe the
destructive aspect of that would not
as much be the military actions
but the way those news
are spread on Twitter
and the panic that creates
I think that's a great case study
what happened
I'm not suggesting that you
let off a nuclear bomb I meant the coronavirus
but yeah
I think that's a really interesting case study
I'm interested in the counterfactual
of 1995
do the same virus in 1995
so first of all it would have been
I get to hear whatever
the nightly news
about it and then they'll be my local
health board will talk about it
that mitigation decisions would
probably necessarily be
very sort of localized
like our community is trying to figure out what are we going to do
what's going to happen like we see this with schools
like where I grew up in New Jersey
there's very localized school districts
so even though they
had sort of really bad viral numbers
there my school I grew up in has been open since the fall
because it's very localized
it's like these teachers and these parents what do we want
to do what are we comfortable with
I live in a school district right now in Montgomery County
that's a billion dollar a year budget
150,000 kid school district
it just can't, it's closed
so I'm interested in that counterfactual
yes you have all this information moving around
and then you have the
the effects on discourse that we were talking about earlier
that the Neil Postman
style effects of Twitter which shifts
people into a sort of a dunk culture mindset
of don't give
an inch to the other team
we're used to this and was fired up by politics
and the unique attributes of Twitter
now throw in the coronavirus and suddenly we see
decades of public health
knowledge a lot of which was honed during the HIV
epidemic was thrown out the window
because a lot of this was happening on Twitter
and suddenly we had public health officials
using a don't give an inch to the other team
mindset of like well if we say this
that might validate something that was wrong
over here and we need to if we say this
and maybe like that'll stop them from doing this
that's like very Twittery
in a way that in 1995 is probably
not the way
public health officials would be thinking
or now it's like well this is if we said this
about masks but the other team said that about
masks we can't give an inch so we got to be
careful and like we can't tell people it's okay
after they're vaccinated because that might
we're giving them an inch on this and that's very
Twittery in my mind right that is the impact
of Twitter on the way
we think about discourse which is a dunking culture
of don't give any inch to the other team and it's all about
slam dunks we are completely right and they're completely wrong
it's as a rhetorical strategy is incredibly
simplistic but it's also the way that we
think right now about how we do debate
it combined terribly
with an election year pandemic
yeah an election year pandemic
I wonder if we could do some smooth analysis
let's run the simulation over a few times
a little bit noise yeah see if
it can dramatically change the behavior of the system
yeah okay we talked about
your love for proving that
something is impossible so there's
quite a few still open problems
and complexity
of algorithms so let me ask
does P equal NP
probably not
probably not if
P equals NP
what kind of
you know and you'll be really surprised
somebody proves it yeah
what would that proof look like
and why would that even be what would that mean
in what possible universe could P equals NP
is there something insightful you can say there
it could
it could be true
I mean I'm not a complexity theorist but every
complexity theorist I know
is convinced they're not equal
and are basically not working on anymore
I mean there is a million dollars at stake if you can
solve the proof it's one of the millennium prizes
okay so here's how I think
the P not equals NP proof is going to eventually
happen I think it's going to fall out
and it's going to be
not super simple
but not as hard as people think because
my theory about a lot of theoretical computer science
based on just some results I've done
so this is a huge extrapolation is that
a lot of what we're doing is just obfuscating
deeper mathematics
so like this happens to me a lot
not a lot but it's happened to me a few times in my work
where we obfuscate it because
we say well there's an algorithm and it has this much
you know memory and they're connected on a network
and okay here's our setup and now we're
trying to see how fast it can solve a problem
and people do bounds about it
and then the end it turns out that like we were just obfuscating
some underlying
you know mathematical thing that already
existed right so this has happened
to me I had this paper I was quite fond
of a while ago it was looking at this
problem called contention resolution
where you you you put
an unknown set of people on a shared channel
and they're trying to break symmetry so
it's like an ethernet whatever only one person
can use it at a time you try to break symmetry there's all these
bounds people have proven over the years
about how long it takes to do this right
and like I discovered
at some point there's this one
combinatorial result
from the early 1990s
all of these lower bound proofs all
come from this and in fact it improved
a lot of them and simplified a lot you could put it all
in one paper you know it's like are we
really and then okay so this new paper that
I submitted a couple weeks ago
I found you could take some of these same lower bound
proofs for this contention resolution problem
you could re prove them using
Shannon source code theorem
that actually when you're breaking contention
what you're really doing is building
a code over
if you have a distribution on the network
sizes is a code over that source
and if you plug in a high entropy
information source and plug in from 1948
the source code theorem that says on
a noiseless channel you can't send things
at a faster rate than the entropy allows
the exact same lower bounds fall back out again
right so like this type of thing happens
there's some famous lower bounds and distributed
algorithms that turned out to all be
algebraic topology underneath the covers
and they won the girdle prize for
working on that so my sense
is what's going to happen is at some point
someone really smart to be
very exciting is going to realize there's
some sort of other representation
of what's going on with these
Turing machines trying to sort of efficiently
actually fall out of that and there'll be
an existing mathematical result
that applies someone
or something I guess it could be
AI theorem provers kind of thing it
could be yeah I mean not a well
I mean there's theorem provers like what
that means now which is
not fun it's just a bunch
of very carefully formulated
postulates that but
I take your point yeah yeah so
okay
you know on a small tangent and then
then you're kind of implying the
mathematics it almost feels like a
kind of weird evolutionary
tree that ultimately leads back to some kind
of ancestral few fundamental
ideas that all they're just like
they're all somehow connected
in that sense
do you think
math is fundamental
to our universe and we're just like slowly
trying to understand
these patterns or
is it discovered
or is it just a
little game that we play
amongst ourselves to try to
fit little patterns to the world
yeah that's the question
right that's the physicist question
I mean I'm probably I'm in the discovered
camp but I don't do theoretical
physics so I know they have
a they feel
like they have a stronger claim to answering that question
but everything comes back
to it everything comes back to it I mean all the physics
the fact that the universe
is well okay
it's a complicated
question so how often
do you think how
deeply does this result
describe the fundamental
reality of nature
so the
the reason I hesitated because it's
something I taught this seminar and did a little
work on what are called biological
algorithms so there's this
notion of
so
physicists use mathematics
to explain the universe
right and it was unreasonable that
mathematics work so well
you know all these differential equations
why does that explain all we need to know about
dynamics and gravity and all these type of things
well there's this movement within
the intersection of computer science and biology
it's kind of wolframmium I guess
really that
algorithms can be very
explanatory right that like if you're trying to
explain
parsimoniously something about
like an ant colony or something like this you're not
going to ultimately it's not going to be
explained as a equation like a
physics equation it's going to be explained by an algorithm
so like this algorithm
run distributedly
is going to explain the behavior so
that's mathematical but not quite mathematical
but it is if you think about an algorithm like a
lambda calculus which brings you back to the
world of mathematics I'm thinking out loud here but
basically
abstract math
is sort of like unreasonably effective
at explaining a lot
of things and that's just what I feel like I glimpse I'm not
a
not like a super well known theoretician I don't have really famous
results so even as a
sort of middling
you know career theoretician I
keep encountering this
where we think we're solving some
problem about computers and algorithms
and it's some much deeper
underlying math it's Shannon
but Shannon is entropy but entropy was
really you know
goes all the way back to
whatever it was boiler all the way back to looking at the early
physics and and
it's anyways to me I think it's
amazing yeah
but it could be the flip side of that could be just
our brains draw so much pleasure from
the deriving generalized
theories and simplifying
the universe that would just naturally
see that kind of simplicity and everything
yeah so that's the whole
you know Newton to Einstein right so
you can you can say this must be right because it's
so predictive well it's not quite
predictive because Mercury wobbles a little bit but I think
we have it set and then you turn out
no Einstein and then and then you get
more like no not Einstein
actually statistical and yeah so
it's hard to also know like where
smooth analysis fits into all that
or a little bit of no like you can
say something very clean
about a system and then
a little bit of noise like the average
case is actually very different and so
yeah I mean that's where like the quantum
mechanics comes in it's like
why does it have to be randomness in this
yeah I would have to do this complex statistics
yeah yeah
so to be determined
yeah that'd be my next book that'd be ambitious
the fundamental
the fundamental core
of reality comma and some advice
for being more productive at work
can I ask you just
if it's possible to do an overview
and just some brief
comments of wisdom
on the process of publishing a book
what's that process until what are the
different options and what's your
recommendation
for somebody that wants
to write a book like yours
a nonfiction book that discovers
something interesting
about this world
so what I usually advise
is follow
the process as is
don't try to reinvent
I think that happens
a lot where
you'll try to reinvent the way the publishing
industry should work like this is kind of
not like in a business model
ways but just like this is what I want to do
I want to write a thousand words a day
and I want to do this and I'm going to put it on the internet
and the publishing industry is very
specific about how it works
and so like when I got started writing books
which was at a very young age so you know
I sold my first book at the age of 21
the way I did that
is I found the family friend
that was an agent
and I said I'm not trying to make you be my
agent just explain to me how this works
not just how the world works but give me
the hard truth about how would a
21 year old under what conditions could a
21 year old sell a book and what would that look like
and she just explained it to me well you have to do this
and have to be a subject that it made sense for you to write
and you would have to do this type of writing for the publications
the validated and blah blah blah
and you have to get the agent first and I learned a whole game plan
and then I executed
and so the rough game plan is with
nonfiction you get the agent first
and the agent is going to sell it to the publishers
so like you're never sending something directly
to the publishers and nonfiction you're not
writing the book first
you're going to get an advance from the publisher once sold
and then you're going to
do the primary writing of the book
in fact it will in most circumstances
hurt you if you've already written
so you're trying to sell
well I guess the agent first you sell it to the agent
and the agent sells it to the publishers
it's much easier to get an agent than a book deal
so the thought is if you can't get an
agent then why would you so you start with
and also in the way this works with a good
agent is they know all the editors
and they have lunch with the editors and they're always just
okay what projects you have coming what are you looking for
here's one of my authors that's the way all these deals happen
it's not you're not emailing a manuscript to
a slush pile
yeah and so first of all the agent takes a percentage
and then the publishers this is where the process
comes in they take also a cut
that's probably ridiculous
so if you try to reinvent
the system you'll probably be frustrated
by the percentage that everyone takes relative
to how much bureaucracy and efficiency
ridiculousness there is in the system
your recommendation is like
you're just one ant
stop trying to build your own ant colony
well or if you
create your own process for how it should work
the book's not going to get published
so there's the separate question the economic question
like should I create my own
self publish it or do something like that
but putting that aside there's a lot of people
I encounter that want to publish a book
with a main publisher but they invent
their own rules for how that works
so then the alternative though is
self publishing and the downside
there's a lot of downsides
it's like it's almost like
publishing an opinion piece in the New York Times
versus writing our blog
there's no reason why
writing a blog post on Medium
can't get way more attention
and legitimacy
and long lasting prestige
than in New York Times article
but nevertheless for most people
writing in a prestigious newspaper
quote unquote prestigious
is just easier
and well and depends
on your goal so you know like
I push you towards a big publisher
because I think your goal
it's huge ideas you want impact
you're going to have more impact
even though like actually
so there's different ways to measure impact
in the world of ideas
and also yeah in the world of ideas
it's kind of like the clubhouse thing
now even if the audience is not large
the people in the audience
are very interesting
it's like the conversation
feels like it has long lasting
impact
among the people who
in different and disparate industries
that are also then starting
normal conversations and all that kind of stuff
yeah because you have other
like self publishing a book
the goals that would solve
you have much better ways of getting to those goals
might be part of it right so if there's the financial aspect
of well you get to keep more of it
I mean the podcast is probably going to crush
what the book is going to do anyways right yeah
if it's
get directly to certain audiences
or crowds it might be harder through a traditional publisher
there's better ways to talk to those crowds
it could be on clubhouse with all these new technologies
self published books not going to be the most effective way
to find your way to a new crowd
but if the idea is like I want to have a
leave a dent
in the world of ideas
then they have a vulnerable old publisher
you know put out your book
in a nice hardcover and do the things
they do
that goes a long way and they do do a lot
it's very difficult actually
they're so much involved in playing together a book
they get books into bookstores and all that kind of stuff
all that stuff and from an efficiency standpoint
I mean just a time involved in trying to do this
yourself is
they have a process right like you said
they have a process I mean I know
like Jaco did this recently he started his own imprint
and I have a couple other but it's a huge
overhead I mean if you like
if you run a business and you
Jaco is a good case study right so he got
you know fed up with Simon and Schuster
dragging their feet and said I'm going to start
my own imprint then if you're not going to publish
my kids book
but he what does he do he runs businesses
right yeah so I think in his world
I already run I'm a partner
in whatever an origin and I have this and that and so it's like
yeah we can run businesses that's what we know
how to do that's what I do I run businesses
I have people but for like you or I
we don't run businesses it'd be terrible
yeah yeah well especially
kinds of businesses right so I do
want to launch a business but very different technology
business very different very different
very different yeah yeah I mean this is
like okay and you copy editors and
graphic book binders and I need
to contract with the printer but the printer doesn't
have slots and so now I have to try to you I mean it's
I get so
I need to shut this off my brain but I get so
frustrated when the system could clearly be improved
it's the thing that you're mentioning
yeah it's like this is so inefficient
every time I go to the DMV or something like
that you think like
this could be done so much better
yeah but you know
and the same thing is
the worry with an editor
which I guess would come from the publisher
like who would
how much
supervision on your book did you receive like
hey do you think this is too long
or do you think the title
how much choice do you have in the title
in the cover in the presentation
in the branding and all that kind of stuff
yeah I mean all of it depends right so
when it comes on
the relationship with the editor
on the writing it depends on the editor and it depends
on you
it's like at this point I'm on my seventh book
and I write for a lot of major
publications and at this point I have
what I feel like is a
voice and a level of craft
that I'm very comfortable with
so my editor is not going to be
she kind of is going to trust me and it's going to be more big picture
like
I've never read here or this seems like it could be
longer whereas the first book I wrote
when I was 21
I had notes such as you start a lot of sentences
with so
you don't use any contractions because I've been doing
scientific writing we don't use contractions
you should probably use contractions
that was way more you know I had to go back
and rewrite the whole thing yeah
but ultimately the recommendation
I mean we talked offline
I was thinking loosely
not really sure but I was thinking of writing a book
and there's a kind of desire to go
self publishing not for financial reasons
and the money can be good by the way right I mean
it's very
power law type just distributed
so the money on a hardcover is somewhere between
one and two dollars a book
so the thing is I personally don't
but you give up 15% of the agent so
I personally don't care about money as I've
mentioned before but I for some reason
really don't like spending money
on things
that are not worth it
I don't care if I get money
I just don't like spending money on
like feeding a system that's
inefficient it's like I'm contributing to the
problem that's my biggest problem
right so you think that you're worried about the
inefficiencies of the
yeah the fact that
the number of people involved or the overhead
the emails again
the fact that
they have this way of speaking
which I'm allergic to many people
like that's very marketing speak
like you could tell they've been having
zoom meetings all day
it's like as opposed to
a sort of creative
collaborators that are like
also a little bit crazy
and I suppose some of that is finding the right people
finding the right people that's what I would say I say
there's definitely and maybe it's just good fortune
good fortune
in terms of like my agents and editors I've worked with
there's really good people
who
see the vision or smart or incredibly
literary they yeah
psychologically yeah I had a great editor
when I was first moving into hard cover books for example
is my first you know
big book advance
and my first sort of big
deal and it was like a senior
editor and it was
very useful you know it was like we had
a lot of long talks right I was
this was my fourth book so good they can't ignore you was
my first big hard cover idea
book
and we had a lot of talks like even before I started
writing it just let's
talk about books and his philosophy
had been in the business for a long time he was the head
of the the head of the imprint it was useful
yeah but
I mean the other frustrating thing is how long the whole thing takes
a long time
yeah I suppose that's you just have to
well I yeah I handed in this manuscript
for the the the book that comes out
now like when this I handed it in
I mean over the summer like during the
pandemic so it's not it's not terrible
right and we were editing during the pandemic and I finished
it in the spring
we've talked most of today
except for a little bit computer science most of today
about a productive life
how does
love friendship and family
fit into that
is there
do you find that there's a tension
is it
possible for relationships to energize
the whole process to benefit
or is it ultimately
a trade off but because life
is short
and ultimately
we seek happiness not productivity
that we have to
accept that tension
I mean I think relationships
is the
that's the whole deal
like I thought about this the other day
I don't know what the context was I was thinking about
if I was going to give like an advice speech
like a commencement address or like to give
an advice to young people
and like the big question
I have for young people is
if they haven't already bad things are going to happen
that you don't control
so what's the plan
let's start figuring that out now
because it's not all good
some people get off better than others but eventually
stuff happens
you get sick, something falls apart
the economy craters
someone you know dies
all sorts of bad stuff is going to happen
so how are we going to do this
like how do we
live life and life is hard
and in ways that is unfair and unpredictable
then relationships is the
that's the buffer for all of that
because we're wired for it
I went down this rabbit hole with digital minimalism
I went down this huge rabbit hole about
the human brain and sociality
it's all we're wired to do
it's like all of our brain is for this
everything, all of our mechanisms
everything is made to service
social connections because of what kept you alive
I mean you had your tribal connections
you didn't starve during the famine
people would share food etc
and so you can't neglect that
and it's like everything
and people feel it right, like there's no
our social networks are hooked up to the pain center
it's why it feels so terrible when you miss someone
like someone dies or something right
that's like how seriously we take it
there's a pretty accepted theory that the default
mode network, like a lot of what the default mode network
is doing so the sort of the default state
our brain goes into when we're not doing something in particular
is practicing sociality
practicing interactions
because it's so crucial to what we do
it's like at the core
of human thriving so I've
more recently the way I think about it is like relationships first
like okay
given that foundation of putting like
and I don't think we put nearly enough time into it
I worry that social media is reducing relationships
strong relationships
strong relationships where you're sacrificing non trivial
time and attention
resources whatever on behalf of other people
that's the net that is
going to allow you to get through anything
then
now what do we want to do with
the surplus that remains may want to build
some build some fire build some tools
so put relationships first I like
the worst case analysis from the computer science
perspective put relationships
first yeah because everything else is just
just
assuming average case
assuming things kind of keep going as they were
going and you're neglecting the fundamental
human drive like we have
this we talked about the boredom instinct we want to build things
we want to have impact we want to do productivity that's
not nearly as clear cut of a drive of we need
people
but if we look at the real worst case
analysis here is
one day
you're pretty young now but
that's not going to last very long
you're going to die one day is that something you think about
a little bit
are you afraid of death well I'm
up the mindset of let's make that a
productivity hack
one of the mindset of
we need to confront that
soon yeah so let's do
what we can now so that when we really confront
and think about it we're more likely to
feel better about it so in other words like let's
focus now on living
and doing things in such a way that we're proud
of so that when it really comes time to confront
that we're more likely
to say like okay I feel kind of good
about the situation so what
when you're laying in your death bed
would you in looking back
would make you think like oh I did
I'm okay I'm proud of that
I optimized the hell out of that
that's a good question that
go backwards on
I mean this is like David Brooks's
eulogy
virtues versus resume virtues
right so his argument is that
that's another interesting DC area
person I keep thinking of interesting DC
area people all right David Brooks is here too
his argument he thinks eulogy virtues
so what we eulogize is different than what
we promote on the resume
that's his whole thing now right
his second mountain wrote the character
both these books are he has this whole premise
of there's like this professional phase
and there's a phase of
giving of yourself and sacrificing on behalf
of other people I don't know
maybe it's all mixed together right you want to
I think living by a code is important
right I mean there's something that's not
emphasized enough I always think of advice
that my undergrad should be given that
they're not given especially at a place like Georgetown
that has this like deep history of
you know trying to promote human flourishing
because of the Jesuit connection
there's such
resiliency and pride that comes out of
living well even when it's hard
like living according to a code living according to
which which you know I think religion
used to structure this for people
and but in its absence you need some sort of
replacement but this even when things where
soldiers get this a lot right the experience
is a lot even when things were tough I was able
to persist in living this way that I knew was right
even though it wasn't the easiest thing to do in the moment
like fewer things give humans more
resiliency like having done that
your relationships were strong right many
people coming to your funeral is the standard
like a lot of people are going to come to your funeral
like I mean you matter to a lot of people
and then maybe having done to to the extent
of whatever capabilities
you are happen to be granted you know
and they're different for different people
and some people can sprint real fast and some people
try to actually do something
of impact
I'll just promise to give
gift cards to anybody who shows up to the funeral
you're going to hack it
even the funeral there's going to be a lottery
wheel you spin when you come in and someone goes away
with ten thousand dollars
see the problem is like with all this
the living by principles
living a principal life focusing on relationships
and kind of thinking
of this life as this perfect thing kind of
forgets the notion that none of it
you know
makes any sense
like the
it kind of implies
that this is like a video game
and you want to get a high score
as opposed to none of this
even makes sense
like why would he
like what that
like what does it even mean
to die it's going to be over
it's like everything I do
all these productivity hacks
all this life all these efforts all these creative efforts
kind of assume it's going to go on forever
there's a kind of sense of immortality
and I don't even know
how to intellectually make sense that it ends
of course got to ask you in that
context what do you think is the meaning
of it all especially for a computer
scientist I mean there's got to be some
mathematical
yeah 27 or what's the
what's the uh...
42 okay
27 is a better number
maybe you're on to something with a 27
I don't want to give away too much
but just trust me 27
it's divisible
so I mean
I don't know obviously right I mean
it's hoping what
I don't know but going back to what you were saying
about the sort of the existentialist
or sort of the more nihilist
style approach the one thing
that there is are intimations
right so that there's these
intimations that human have
somehow this feels right and this feels
wrong this feels good this feels like
I'm doing I mean aligned
with something you know when I'm acting with courage
to save whatever right it's not
these intimations are agrounding against arbitrariness
like one of the ideas I'm really
interested in is that
uh... when you look at religion
right so I'm
interested in world religions for
my grandfather was like a theologian
that studied and wrote all these books and I'm very interested
in this type of stuff and there's
this great book that's
it's not
specific to a particular religion but it's Karen
Armstrong wrote this great book called the case for God
she's very interesting she was
a Catholic nun who sort of left that religion
and is but one of the smartest
thinkers in terms
of like accessible theological thinking
that's not tied to any particular religion
her whole argument
is that the way to understand religion you
first of all you have to go way back pre enlightenment where all this was formed
we got messed up thinking about religion
post enlightenment right and
um...
these are operating systems for making sense of intimations
the
one thing we had were these different intimations
of this field like ah
and mystical experience
and this feels something there's something you feel
when you act in a certain way and don't act in this other way
and it was like the scientists
who were trying to study
and understand the model of the atom by just looking at
experiments and trying to understand
what's going on like the great religions of the world were basically
figuring out how do we make
sense of these intimations and live in alignment
with them and build a life of meaning around that
what were the tools they were using
they were using ritual they were using belief
they were using action but all of it was like
an OS it was like a
liturgical model of the atom that
it's hard coded in so it did
through the
evolutionary process
they wouldn't have called it that back then or yeah
I mean whether they said who
they didn't have that as pre enlightenment they just say this is here
and
the directive is to try to live in alignment
with that
well then I want to ask who wrote the original code
that's the open question
yeah so Armstrong lays out this good argument and where it gets really interesting
is that she emphasizes
that all of this was considered
unethical right so the whole notion
and this is like rich and Jewish tradition in particular
and also an Islamic tradition
we can't comprehend and understand
what's going on here right and so
the best we can do to approximate understanding
and live in alignment is we act as if this is true
do these rituals
have these actions or whatever
post enlightenment a lot of that got
once we learned about enlightenment
we grew these suspicions
around religion that are very much of the modern
era right so like the
Karen Armstrong like Sam Harris's critique of religion
makes no sense
right the critiques based on
you're making the ascent to propositions that you think are true
for which you do not have evidence that they are true
that's an enlightenment thing right this is not
the context and this is not the religion
is the Rutherford model
of the atom like it's not actually maybe what
is underneath happening
but this model explains why your chemical equations
work and so this is like the way religion was
you there's a god we'll call it
this this is how it works we do this ritual we act
in this way it aligns with it just like the model
the atom predicted why you know
N.A. and C.L. is going to become salt this predicts
that you're going to feel and live in alignment right
it's like this beautiful sophisticated
theory which actually matches how a lot of
great theologians have you know thought
about it but then when you come forward
in time yeah maybe it's evolution I mean
this is like what Peterson hints at right
like he's basically
he's not
he doesn't like to get super pinned down
on this but it kind of seems where
he's almost like searching for the words
he focuses more like Jung and other people
but I mean I know he's very Jungian
but that same type of analysis
I think roughly speaking like Armstrong
is sort of a it's kind of like a Peter
Sony analysis but she's looking
more at the deep history of religion
then but yeah
he throws in an evolutionary
and I wonder what home it finds
I wonder what the new home is if religion
dissipates
with the new home for these kinds of
natural inclinations are
yeah with their technology
whether and if it's evolution I mean this is
Francis Collins's book also he's like well
that's a religious
that could be a very religious notion
I don't I think this stuff is interesting I'm not a very
religious person but I'm
I'm thinking it's not a bad idea
maybe what replaces honestly like maybe
what replaces religion is a return to
religion but in this
sort of more sophisticated
I mean if you went back
it's the issue with like a lot of the
recent critiques I think is it's
it's a strawman critique
in a complicated way right because
the whole way these the way this
works I mean the theologians if you're reading
if you're reading
if you're reading these people they're thinking
very sophisticated about religion in terms of this
it's ineffable and we're just these things
and this is deep it connects us to these
things in a way that puts life in alignment
we can't really explain what's going on because
our brains can't handle it right
for the average person though
this notion of live as if
it's kind of how religions work
is live as if this is true
it's like an OS for getting in alignment
with because we through
evolution like you behave in this way
do these which live as if this is true
gives you
what the goal you're looking for
but that's a complicated thing live as if this
is true because if you
especially if you're not a theologian to say
yeah this is not true
in an alignment sense but I'm living as if it kind of
takes the heat out of it but of course
it's what people are doing because
highly religious people still do bad things
where if you really were there's absolutely
a hell and I'm definitely going to go to it if I do this bad thing
you would never have
known whatever murder anyone if they were an evangelical Christian
right so it's like what
this is kind of a tangent that I'm
I'm on shaky ground here but
it's something I've been interested
often on a lot
I think we're in some sense searching for
because it does make for a good operating system
we're searching for a good
live as if X is true
and we're searching for a new X
and maybe artificial intelligence
will be the very
the new gods
that we're so desperately looking
for or it'll just spit out 42
I thought it was 27
Cal this is
as you know I've been a huge fan
so are a huge number
of people that I've
spoken with so they could be telling me
I absolutely have to talk to you this is a huge
honor this is really fun thanks for wasting all
this time with me and likewise I've been a long
time fan so this is a lot of fun yeah thanks
man thanks for listening
this conversation with Cal Newport
and thank you to our sponsors
ExpressVPN
Linode Linux Virtual Machines
Sunbasket Meal Delivery Service
and SimplySafe Home Security
click the
sponsor links to get a discount
and to support this podcast
and now let me leave you with some words
from Cal himself
clarity about what matters
provides clarity about what does not
thank you for listening
and hope to see you next time